Child reading. -- You are given a book from the school library. In
the lower classes they are simply handed out. Only now and
again do you dare to express a wish. Often, in envy, you see
coveted books pass into other hands. At last desire was granted.
For a week you were wholly given up to the soft drift of the text,
that surrounded you as secretly, densely and unceasingly as
snowflakes. You entered it with limitless trust. The peacefulness
of the book that enticed you further and further! Its contents
did not much matter. For you were reading at the time when
you still made up stories in bed. The child seeks his way along
the half-hidden paths. Reading, he covers his ears; the book is
on a table that is far too high, and one hand is always on the
page. To him the hero's adventures can still be read in the
swirling letters like figures and messages in drifting snowflakes.
His breath is part of the air of the events narrated, and all the
participants breathe with his life. He mingles with the characters
far more closely than grown-ups do. He is unspeakably
touched by the deeds, the words that are exchanged, and, when
he gets up, is blanched over and over by the snow of his reading.

Belated child. -- The clock over the school playground seems as if
damaged on his account. The hands stand at: "Late". And in
the corridor, from classroom doors as he passes, come murmurs
of conspiracy. The teachers and pupils behind them are friends.
Or all is silent, as if they were waiting. Inaudibly he puts his
hand to the doorhandle. The spot where he stands is steeped in
sunlight. Violating the peaceful hour he opens the door. The
teacher's voice clatters like a mill-wheel; he stands before the
grinding stones. The voice clatters on without a break, but the
mill-hands now shake off their load to the newcomer; ten,
twenty heavy sacks fly towards him, that he must carry to the
bench. Each thread of his jacket is flour-white. Like those of a
wretched soul at midnight, his every step makes uproar, and
no one sees. Once arrived at his seat, he works quietly with the
rest until the bell sounds. But it avails him nothing.

Pilfering child. -- Through the chink of the scarcely open larder
door his hand advances like a lover through the night. Once at
home in the darkness, it gropes towards sugar or almonds, sultanas
or preserves. And as the lover, before kissing her, embraces
his girl, his hand enjoys a tactile tryst with the comestibles
before his mouth savours their sweetness. How invitingly honey,
heaps of currants, even rice yield to his hand. How passionate
this meeting of two who have at last escaped the spoon. Grateful
and tempestuous as one who has been abducted from the
parental home, strawberry jam, unencumbered by bread rolls,
abandons itself to his delectation as under the open sky, and
even the butter responds tenderly to the boldness of this wooer
who has penetrated her boudoir. His hand, the juvenile Don
Juan, has soon invaded all the cells and spaces, leaving behind
it running layers and streaming plenty: maidenliness renewing
itself without complaint.

Child on the roundabout. -- The board carrying the docile animals
moves close to the ground. It is at the height which, in dreams,
is best for flying. Music starts and the child moves with a jerk
away from his mother. First he is afraid at leaving her. But then
he notices how doughty he himself is. He is ensconced as the just
ruler over a world that belongs to him. Tangential trees and
natives line his way. Then, in an Orient, his mother reappears.
Next, emerging from the jungle, comes a treetop, exactly as the
child saw it thousands of years ago -- just now on the roundabout.
His beast is devoted: like a mute Arion he rides his silent fish, or
a wooden Zeus-bull carries him off as an immaculate Europa.
The eternal recurrence of all things has long become child's
wisdom to him, and life a primeval frenzy of domination, with
the booming orchestrion as the crown jewels at the centre. As
the music slows, space begins to stammer and the trees to rub
their brows. The roundabout becomes uncertain ground. And
his mother appears, the much-rammed stake about which the
landing child winds the rope of his gaze.

Untidy child. -- Each stone he finds, each flower picked and each
butterfly caught is already the start of a collection, and every
single thing he owns makes up one great collection. In him this
passion shows its true face, the stern Indian expression which
lingers on, but with a dimmed and manic glow, in antiquarians,
researchers, bibliomaniacs. Scarcely has he entered life than he
is a hunter. He hunts the spirits whose trace he scents in things;
between spirits and things years are passed in which his field of
vision remains free of people. His life is like a dream: he knows
nothing lasting; everything seemingly happens to him by
chance. His nomad-years are hours in the forest of dream. To it
he drags home his booty, to purify it, secure it, cast out its spell.
His drawers must become arsenal and zoo, crime museum and
crypt. "To tidy up" would be to demolish an edifice full of
prickly chestnuts that are spiky clubs, tinfoil that is hoarded
silver, bricks that are coffins, cacti that are totem-poles and
copper pennies that are shields. The child has long since helped
at his mother's linen-cupboard, his father's bookshelves, while
in his own domain he is still a sporadic, warlike visitor.

Child hiding. -- He already knows all the hiding places in the
apartment and returns to them as to a house where everything
is sure to be just as it was. His heart pounds, he holds his breath.
Here he is enclosed in the world of matter. It becomes immensely
distinct, speechlessly obtrusive. In such manner does a man who
is being hanged become aware of the reality of rope and wood.
Standing behind the doorway curtain, the child becomes himself
something floating and white, a ghost. The dining table
under which he is crouching turns him into the wooden idol in a
temple whose four pillars are the carved legs. And behind a
door he is himself door, wears it as his heavy mask and as a
shaman will bewitch all those who unsuspectingly enter. At no
cost must he be found. When he pulls faces, he is told, the clock
need only strike and he will remain so. The element of truth in
this he finds out in his hiding place. Anyone who discovers him
can petrify him as an idol under the table, weave him forever
as a ghost into the curtain, banish him for life into the heavy
door. And so, at the seeker's touch he drives out with a loud cry
the demon who has so transformed him -- indeed, without waiting
for the moment of discovery, he grabs the hunter with a
shout of self-deliverance. That is why he does not tire of the
struggle with the demon. In this struggle the apartment is the
arsenal of his masks. Yet once each year, in mysterious places, in
their empty eye-sockets, their fixed mouths, presents lie. Magic
discovery becomes science. As its engineer the child disenchants
the gloomy parental apartment and looks for Easter eggs.
