Sailors seldom come ashore; service on the high seas is a holiday
by comparison with the labour in harbours, where loading and
unloading must often be done day and night. When a gang is
then given a few hours' shore-leave it is already dark. At best
the cathedral looms like a dark promontory on the way to the
tavern. The ale-house is the key to every town; to know where
German beer can be drunk is geography and ethnology enough.
The German seamen's bar unrolls the nocturnal plan of the
city: to find the way from there to the brothel, to the other bars
is not difficult. Their names have criss-crossed the mealtime
conversations for days. For when a harbour has been left behind,
one sailor after another hoists like little pennants the nicknames
of bars and dance-halls, beautiful women and national dishes
from the next. But who knows whether he will go ashore this
time? For this reason, no sooner is the ship declared and moored
than tradesmen come aboard with souvenirs: chains and picture
postcards, oil-paintings, knives and little marble figures. The
city sights are not seen but bought. In the sailors' chests the
leather belt from Hong Kong is juxtaposed to a panorama of
Palermo and a girl's photo from Stettin. And their real habitat
is exactly the same. They know nothing of the hazy distances in
which, for the bourgeois, foreign lands are enshrouded. What
first asserts itself in every city is, first, service on board, and then
German beer, English shaving-soap and Dutch tobacco. Imbued
to the marrow with the international norm of industry, they are
not the dupes of palms and icebergs. The seaman is sated with
close-ups, and only the most exact nuances speak to him. He can
distinguish countries better by the preparation of their fish than
by their building-styles or landscapes. He is so much at home in
detail that the ocean routes where he cuts close to other ships
(greeting those of his own firm with howls from the siren) become
noisy thoroughfares where you have to give way to traffic.
He lives on the open sea in a city where, on the Marseilles
Cannebière, a Port Said bar stands diagonally opposite a Hamburg
brothel, and the Neapolitan Castel del Ovo is to be found
on Barcelona's Plaza Cataluña. For officers their native town
still holds pride of place. But for the ordinary sailor, or the
stoker, the people whose transported labour-power maintains
contact with the commodities in the hull of the ship, the interlaced
harbours are no longer even a homeland, but a cradle.
And listening to them one realizes what mendacity resides in
tourism.
