Karl Kraus. -- Nothing more desolating than his acolytes, nothing
more god-forsaken than his adversaries. No name that would be
more fittingly honoured by silence. In ancient armour, wrathfully
grinning, a Chinese idol, brandishing drawn swords in
each hand, he dances a war-dance before the burial vault of the
German language. He, "merely one of the epigones that live in
the old house of language", has become the sealer of its tomb.
In day and night watches he endures. No post was ever more
loyally held, and none ever was more hopelessly lost. Here stands
one who fetches water from the tear-seas of his contemporaries
like a Danaide, and from whose hands the rock which is to bury
his enemies rolls like that of Sisyphus. What more helpless than
his conversion? What more powerless than his humanity? What
more hopeless than his battle with the press? What does he
know of the powers that are his true allies? But what vision of the
new seers bears comparison with the listening of this shaman,
whose utterances even a defunct language inspires? Who ever
conjured up a spirit as Kraus did in the "Forsaken", as if
"Blessed Yearning" had never been composed? Helpless as only
spirits' voices are when summoned up, a murmur from the
chthonic depths of language is the source of his soothsaying.
Every sound is incomparably genuine, but they all leave us
bewildered like messages from the beyond. Blind like the manes
language calls him to vengeance, as narrow-minded as spirits
that know only the voice of the blood, who care not what havoc
they wreak in the realm of the living. But he cannot err. Their
commands are infallible. Whoever tries his arm with him is
condemned already: in this mouth the adversary's name itself
becomes a judgement. When his lips part, the colourless flame
of wit darts forth. And none who walks the paths of life would
come upon him. On an archaic field of honour, a gigantic battleground
of bloody labour, he rages before a deserted sepulchre.
The honours at his death will be immeasurable, and the last that
are bestowed.