Medallion. -- ln everything that is with reason called beautiful,
appearance has a paradoxical effect.

Prayer-wheel. -- Only images in the mind vitalize the will. The
mere word, by contrast, at most inflames it, to leave it smouldering,
blasted. There is no intact will without exact pictorial
imagination. No imagination without innervation. Now breathing
is the latter's most delicate regulator. The sound of formulae
is a canon of such breathing. Hence the practice of meditating
Yoga, which breathes in accord with the holy syllables. Hence
its omnipotence.

Antique spoon. -- One thing is reserved to the greatest epic writers:
the capacity to feed their heroes.

Old map. -- In a love affair most seek an eternal homeland.
Others, but very few, eternal voyaging. These latter are melancholics,
for whom contact with mother earth is to be shunned.
They seek the person who will keep far from them the homeland's
sadness. To that person they remain faithful. The
medieval complexion-books understood the yearning of this
human type for long journeys.

Fan. -- The following experience will be familiar: if one is in
love, or just intensely preoccupied with another, his portrait
will appear in almost every book. Moreover, he appears as both
protagonist and antagonist. In stories, novels, and novellas he
is encountered in endless metamorphoses. And from this it follows
that the faculty of imagination is the gift of interpolating
into the infinitely small, of inventing, for every intensity, an
extensiveness to contain its new, compressed fullness, in short,
of receiving each image as if it were that of the folded fan, which
only in spreading draws breath and flourishes, in its new expanse,
the beloved features within it.

Relief -- One is with the woman one loves, speaks with her.
Then, weeks or months later, separated from her, one thinks
again of what was talked of then. And now the motif seems
banal, tawdry, shallow, and one realizes that it was she alone,
bending low over it with love, who shaded and sheltered it
before us, so that the thought was alive in all its folds and
crevices like a relief. Alone, as now, we see it lie flat, bereft of
comfort and shadow, in the light of our knowledge.

Torso. -- Only he who can view his own past as an abortion
sprung from compulsion and need can use it to full advantage in
the present. For what one has lived is at best comparable to a
beautiful statue which has had all its limbs knocked off in
transit, and now yields nothing but the precious block out of
which the image of one's future must be hewn.
