If one had to expound the doctrine of antiquity with utmost
brevity while standing on one leg, as did Hillel that of the Jews,
it could only be in this sentence: "They alone shall possess the
earth who live from the powers of the cosmos." Nothing distinguishes
the ancient from the modern man so much as the
former's absorption in a cosmic experience scarcely known to
later periods. Its waning is marked by the flowering of astronomy
at the beginning of the modem age. Kepler, Copernicus,
and Tycho Brahe were certainly not driven by scientific impulses
alone. All the same, the exclusive emphasis on an optical
connection to the universe, to which astronomy very quickly
led, contained a portent of what was to come. The ancients'
intercourse with the cosmos had been different: the ecstatic
trance. For it is in this experience alone that we gain certain
knowledge of what is nearest to us and what is remotest to us,
and never of one without the other. This means, however, that
man can be in ecstatic contact with the cosmos only communally.
It is the dangerous error of modern men to regard this
experience as unimportant and avoidable, and to consign it to
the individual as the poetic rapture of starry nights. It is not; its
hour strikes again and again, and then neither nations nor
generations can escape it, as was made terribly clear by the last
war, which was an attempt at new and unprecedented commingling
with the cosmic powers. Human multitudes, gases,
electrical forces were hurled into the open country, highfrequency
currents coursed through the landscape, new constellations 
rose in the sky, aerial space and ocean depths
thundered with propellers, and everywhere sacrificial shafts
were dug in Mother Earth. This immense wooing of the cosmos
was enacted for the first time on a planetary scale, that is, in the
spirit of technology. But because the lust for profit of the ruling
class sought satisfaction through it, technology betrayed man
and turned the bridal bed into a bloodbath. The mastery of
nature, so the imperialists teach, is the purpose of all technology.
But who would trust a cane wielder who proclaimed the mastery
of children by adults to be the purpose of education? Is not
education above all the indispensable ordering of the relationship
between generations and therefore mastery, if we are to use
this term, of that relationship and not of children? And likewise
technology is not the mastery of nature but of the relation
between nature and man. Men as a species completed their
development thousands of years ago; but mankind as a species
is just beginning his. In technology a physis is being organized
through which mankind's contact with the cosmos takes a new
and different form from that which it had in nations and
families. One need recall only the experience of velocities by
virtue of which mankind is now preparing to embark on incalculable
journeys into the interior of time, to encounter there
rhythms from which the sick shall draw strength as they did
earlier on high mountains or at Southern seas. The "Lunaparks"
are a prefiguration of sanatoria. The paroxysm of genuine cosmic
experience is not tied to that tiny fragment of nature that we are
accustomed to call "Nature". In the nights of annihilation of the
last war the frame of mankind was shaken by a feeling that
resembled the bliss of the epileptic. And the revolts that followed
it were the first attempt of mankind to bring the new body
under its control. The power of the proletariat is the measure of
its convalescence. If it is not gripped to the very marrow by the
discipline of this power, no pacifist polemics will save it. Living
substance conquers the frenzy of destruction only in the ecstasy
of procreation.
