The Writer's Technique in Thirteen Theses.

I. Anyone intending to embark on a major work should be
lenient with himself and, having completed a stint, deny himself
nothing that will not prejudice the next.

II. Talk about what you have written, by all means, but do
not read from it while the work is in progress. Every gratification
procured in this way will slacken your tempo. If this regime is
followed, the growing desire to communicate will become in the
end a motor for completion.

III. In your working conditions avoid everyday mediocrity.
Semi-relaxation, to a background of insipid sounds, is degrading.
On the other hand, accompaniment by an etude or a cacophony
of voices can become as significant for work as the perceptible
silence of the night. If the latter sharpens the inner ear, the
former acts as touchstone for a diction ample enough to bury
even the most wayward sounds.

IV. Avoid haphazard writing materials. A pedantic adherence
to certain papers, pens, inks is beneficial. No luxury, but an
abundance of these utensils is indispensable.

V. Let no thought pass incognito, and keep your notebook as
strictly as the authorities keep their register of aliens.

VI. Keep your pen aloof from inspiration, which it will then
attract with magnetic power. The more circumspectly you
delay writing down an idea, the more maturely developed it will
be on surrendering itself. Speech conquers thought, but writing
commands it.

VII. Never stop writing because you have run out of ideas.
Literary honour requires that one break off only at an appointed
moment (a mealtime, a meeting) or at the end of the work.

VIII. Fill the lacunae of inspiration by tidily copying out what
is already written. Intuition will awaken in the process.

IX. Nulla dies sine Linea-but there may well be weeks.

X. Consider no work perfect over which you have not once
sat from evening to broad daylight.

XI. Do not write the conclusion of a work in your familiar
study. You would not find the necessary courage there.

XII. Stages of composition: idea-style-writing. The value
of the fair copy is that in producing it you confine attention to
calligraphy. The idea kills inspiration, style fetters the idea,
writing pays off style.

XIII. The work is the death mask of its conception.

Thirteen Theses Against Snobs.
(Snob in the private office of art criticism. On the left, a child's
drawing, on the right a fetish. Snob: "Doesn't this make Picasso
seem such a waste of time?")

I. The artist makes a work. 

The primitive expresses himself in documents.

II. The art-work is only incidentally a document. 

No document is as such a work of art.

III. The art-work is a masterpiece.

The document serves to instruct.

Before documents, a public is educated.

IV. On art-works, artists learn their craft.

Before documents, a public is educated.

V. Art-works are remote from each other in their perfection.

All documents communicate through their subject matter.

VI. In the art-work content and form are one: meanmg.

In documents, the subject matter is wholly dominant.

VII. Meaning is the outcome of experience.

Subject-matter is the outcome of dreams.

VIII. In the art-work subject matter is a ballast jettisoned during contemplation.

The more one loses oneself in a document, the denser the subject matter grows.

IX. In the art-work the formal law is central.

Forms are merely disperesed in documents.

X. The art-work is synthetic: an energy-centre.

The fertility of a document demands: analysis

XI. The impact of an artwork increases with repeated viewing.

A document overpowers only through surprise.

XII. The virility of works lies in assault.

The document's innocence gives it cover.

XIII. The artist sets out to conquer meanmgs.

The primitive man barricades himself behind subject-matter

The Critic's Technique in Thirteen Theses.

I. The critic is the strategist in the literary battle.

II. He who cannot take sides should keep silent.

III. The critic has nothing in common with the interpreter of
past cultural epochs.

IV. Criticism must talk the language of artists. For the terms of
the cénacle are slogans. And only in slogans is the battle-cry heard.

V. "Objectivity" must always be sacrificed to partisanship, if
the cause fought for merits this.

VI. Criticism is a moral question. If Goethe misjudged Holderlin
and Kleist, Beethoven and Jean Paul, his morality and not
his artistic discernment was at fault.

VII. For the critic his colleagues are the higher authority. Not
the public. Still less posterity.

VIII. Posterity forgets or acclaims. Only the critic judges in
face of the author.

IX. Polemics mean to destroy a book in a few of its sentences.
The less it has been studied the better. Only he who can destroy
can criticize.

X. Genuine polemics approach a book as lovingly as a cannibal
spices a baby.

XI. Artistic enthusiasm is alien to the critic. In his hand the
art-work is the shining sword in the battle of minds.

XII. The art of the critic in a nutshell: to coin slogans without
betraying ideas. The slogans of an inadequate criticism peddle
ideas to fashion.

XIII. The public must always be proved wrong, yet always feel
represented by the critic.