The hours that hold the figure and the form
Have run their course within the house of dream.

Cellar. -- We have long forgotten the ritual by which the house
of our life was erected. But when it is under assault and enemy
bombs are already taking their toll, what enervated, perverse
antiquities do they not lay bare in the foundations. What things
were interred and sacrificed amid magic incantations, what horrible
cabinet of curiosities lies there below, where the deepest
shafts are reserved for what is most commonplace. In a night of
despair I dreamed I was with my first friend from my school
days, whom I had not seen for decades and had scarcely ever
remembered in that time, tempestuously renewing our friendship
and brotherhood. But when I awoke it became clear that
what despair had brought to light like a detonation was the
corpse of that boy, who had been immured as a warning: that
whoever one day lives here may in no respect resemble him.

Vestibule. -- A visit to Goethe's house. I cannot recall having seen
rooms in the dream. It was a perspective of whitewashed corridors
like those in a school. Two elderly English lady visitors and
a curator are the dream's extras. The curator requests us to sign
the visitors' book lying open on a desk at the farthest end of a
passage. On reaching it, I find as I turn the pages my name
already entered in big, unruly, childish characters.

Dining Hall. -- In a dream I saw myself in Goethe's study. It
bore no resemblance to the one in Weimar. Above all, it was
very small and had only one window. The side of the writing
desk abutted on the wall opposite the window. Sitting and
writing at it was the poet, in extreme old age. I was standing to
one side when he broke off to give me a small vase, an urn from
antiquity, as a present. I turned it between my hands. An
immense heat filled the room. Goethe rose to his feet and
accompanied me to an adjoining chamber, where a table was
set for my relatives. It seemed prepared, however, for many
more than their number. Doubtless there were places for my
ancestors, too. At the end, on the right, I sat down beside
Goethe. When the meal was over, he rose with difficulty, and
by gesturing I sought leave to support him. Touching his
elbow, I began to weep with emotion.