00
Epigraph

This street is named Asja Lacis Street 
after her who 
as an engineer 
cut it through the author 

1
Filling Station

The construction of life is at present in the power of facts far
more than of convictions, and of such facts as have scarcely ever
become the basis of convictions. Under these circumstances true
literary activity cannot aspire to take place within a literary
framework -- this is, rather, the habitual expression of its sterility.
Significant literary work can only come into being in a strict
alternation between action and writing; it must nurture the
inconspicuous forms that better fit its influence in active communities
than does the pretentious, universal gesture of the book
 -- in leaflets, brochures, articles, and placards. Only this prompt
language shows itself actively equal to the moment. Opinions
are to the vast apparatus of social existence what oil is to
machines: one does not go up to a turbine and pour machine
oil over it; one applies a little to hidden spindles and joints that
one has to know.

2
Breakfast Room

A popular tradition warns against recounting dreams on an
empty stomach. In this state, though awake, one remains under
the sway of the dream. For washing brings only the surface of
the body and the visible motor functions into the light, while in
the deeper strata, even during the morning ablution, the grey
penumbra of dream persists and, indeed, in the solitude of the
first waking hour, consolidates itself. He who shuns contact with
the day, whether for fear of his fellow men or for the sake of
inward composure, is unwilling to eat and disdains his breakfast.
He thus avoids a rupture between the nocturnal and the
daytime worlds -- a precaution justified only by the combustion
of dream in a concentrated morning's work, if not in prayer, but
otherwise a source of confusion between vital rhythms. The
narration of dreams brings calamity, because a person still half
in league with the dream world betrays it in his words and must
incur its revenge. Expressed in more modern terms: he betrays
himself. He has outgrown the protection of dreaming naïveté,
and in laying clumsy hands on his dream visions he surrenders
himself. For only from the far bank, from broad daylight, may
dream be recalled with impunity. This further side of dream is
only attainable through a cleansing analogous to washing yet
totally different. By way of the stomach. The fasting man tells
his dream as if he were talking in his sleep.

3
No. 113

The hours that hold the figure and the form
Have run their course within the house of dream.

Cellar. -- We have long forgotten the ritual by which the house
of our life was erected. But when it is under assault and enemy
bombs are already taking their toll, what enervated, perverse
antiquities do they not lay bare in the foundations. What things
were interred and sacrificed amid magic incantations, what horrible
cabinet of curiosities lies there below, where the deepest
shafts are reserved for what is most commonplace. In a night of
despair I dreamed I was with my first friend from my school
days, whom I had not seen for decades and had scarcely ever
remembered in that time, tempestuously renewing our friendship
and brotherhood. But when I awoke it became clear that
what despair had brought to light like a detonation was the
corpse of that boy, who had been immured as a warning: that
whoever one day lives here may in no respect resemble him.

Vestibule. -- A visit to Goethe's house. I cannot recall having seen
rooms in the dream. It was a perspective of whitewashed corridors
like those in a school. Two elderly English lady visitors and
a curator are the dream's extras. The curator requests us to sign
the visitors' book lying open on a desk at the farthest end of a
passage. On reaching it, I find as I turn the pages my name
already entered in big, unruly, childish characters.

Dining Hall. -- In a dream I saw myself in Goethe's study. It
bore no resemblance to the one in Weimar. Above all, it was
very small and had only one window. The side of the writing
desk abutted on the wall opposite the window. Sitting and
writing at it was the poet, in extreme old age. I was standing to
one side when he broke off to give me a small vase, an urn from
antiquity, as a present. I turned it between my hands. An
immense heat filled the room. Goethe rose to his feet and
accompanied me to an adjoining chamber, where a table was
set for my relatives. It seemed prepared, however, for many
more than their number. Doubtless there were places for my
ancestors, too. At the end, on the right, I sat down beside
Goethe. When the meal was over, he rose with difficulty, and
by gesturing I sought leave to support him. Touching his
elbow, I began to weep with emotion.

4
For Men

To convince is to conquer without conception.

5
Standard Clock

To great writers, finished works weigh lighter than those fragments
on which they work throughout their lives. For only the
more feeble and distracted take an inimitable pleasure in conclusions,
feeling themselves thereby given back to life. For the
genius each caesura, and the heavy blows of fate, fall like gentle
sleep itself into his workshop labour. About it he draws a charmed
circle of fragments. "Genius is application."

6
Come Back! All Is Forgiven!

Like someone performing the giant swing on the horizontal bar,
each boy spins for himself the wheel of fortune from which,
sooner or later, the momentous lot shall fall. For only that which
we knew or practised at fifteen will one day constitute our
attraction. And one thing, therefore, can never be made good:
having neglected to run away from home. From forty-eight
hours' exposure in those years, as in a caustic solution, the
crystal of life's happiness forms.

7
Manorially Furnished
Ten-Room Apartment

The furniture style of the second half of the nineteenth century
has received its only adequate description, and analysis, in a
certain type of detective novel at the dynamic centre of which
stands the horror of apartments. The arrangement of the furniture
is at the same time the site plan of deadly traps, and the
suite of rooms prescribes the fleeing victim's path. That this kind
of detective novel begins with Poe -- at a time when such
accommodations hardly yet existed -- is no counter-argument.
For without exception the great writers perform their combinations
in a world that comes after them, just as the Paris streets of
Baudelaire's poems, as well as Dostoevsky's characters, only
existed after 1900. The bourgeois interior of the 1860s to the
1890s, with its gigantic sideboards distended with carvings, the
sunless corners where palms stand, the balcony embattled
behind its balustrade, and the long corridors with their singing
gas flames, fittingly houses only the corpse. "On this sofa the
aunt cannot but be murdered." The soulless luxuriance of the
furnishings becomes true comfort only in the presence of a dead
body. Far more interesting than the Oriental landscapes in
detective novels is that rank Orient inhabiting their interiors:
the Persian carpet and the ottoman, the hanging lamp and the
genuine Caucasian dagger. Behind the heavy, gathered Khilim
tapestries the master of the house has orgies with his share
certificates, feels himself the Eastern merchant, the indolent
pasha in the caravanserai of otiose enchantment, until that
dagger in its silver sling above the divan puts an end, one fine
afternoon, to his siesta and himself. This character of the bourgeois
apartment, tremulously awaiting the nameless murderer
like a lascivious old lady her gallant, has been penetrated by a
number of authors who, as writers of "detective stories" -- and
perhaps also because in their works part of the bourgeois
pandemonium is exhibited -- have been denied the reputation
they deserve. The quality in question has been captured in
isolated writings by Conan Doyle and in a major production by
A. K. Green; and with The Phantom of the Opera, one of the great
novels about the nineteenth century, Gaston Leroux has
brought the genre to its apotheosis.

8
Chinese Curios

These are days when no one should rely unduly on his "competence".
Strength lies in improvisation. All the decisive blows
are struck left-handed.

At the beginning of the long downhill lane that leads to the
house of ---, whom I visited each evening, is a gate. After she
moved, the opening of its archway stood henceforth before me
like an ear that has lost the power of hearing.

A child in his nightshirt cannot be prevailed upon to greet an 
arriving visitor. Those present, invoking a higher moral standpoint,
admonish him in vain to overcome his prudery. A few
minutes later he reappears, now stark naked, before the visitor.
In the meantime he has washed.

The power of a country road is different when one is walking
along it from when one is flying over it by airplane. In the same
way, the power of a text is different when it is read from when
it is copied out. The airplane passenger sees only how the road
pushes through the landscape, how it unfolds according to the
same laws as the terrain surrounding it. Only he who walks the
road on foot learns of the power it commands, and of how, from
the very scenery that for the flier is only the unfurled plain, it
calls forth distances, belvederes, clearings, prospects at each of
its turns like a commander deploying soldiers at a front. Only
the copied text thus commands the soul of him who is occupied
with it, whereas the mere reader never discovers the new aspects
of his inner self that are opened by the text, that road cut through
the interior jungle forever closing behind it: because the reader
follows the movement of his mind in the free flight of daydreaming,
whereas the copier submits it to command. The
Chinese practice of copying books was thus an incomparable
guarantee ofliterary culture, and the transcript a key to China's
enigmas.

9
Gloves

In an aversion to animals the predominant feeling is fear of
being recognized by them through contact. The horror that
stirs deep in man is an obscure awareness that in him something
lives so akin to the animal that it might be recognized. All disgust
is originally disgust at touching. Even when the feeling is
mastered, it is only by a drastic gesture that overleaps its mark:
the nauseous is violently engulfed, eaten, while the zone of finest
epidermal contact remains taboo. Only in this way is the paradox 
of the moral demand to be met, exacting simultaneously
the overcoming and the subtlest elaboration of man's sense of
disgust. He may not deny his bestial relationship with animals,
the invocation of which revolts him: he must make himself its
master.

10
Mexican Embassy

Je ne passe jamais devant un fétiche de bois, un Bouddha doré, une idole
mexicaine sans me dire: c'est peut-étre le vrai dieu. (I never pass by a
wooden fetish, a gilded Buddha, a Mexican idol without reflecting:
perhaps it is the true God.)
Charles Baudelaire

I dreamed I was a member of an exploring party in Mexico.
After crossing a high, primeval jungle, we came upon a system
of above-ground caves in the mountains where an order had
survived from the time of the first missionaries till now, its
monks continuing the work of conversion among the natives.
In an immense central grotto with a Gothically pointed roof,
Mass was celebrated according to the most ancient rites. We
joined the ceremony and witnessed its climax: toward a wooden
bust of God the Father fixed high on a wall of the cave, a priest
raised a Mexican fetish. At this the divine head turned thrice in
denial from right to left.

11
To The Public: Please Protect and
Preserve These New Plantings

What is "solved"? Do not all the questions of our lives, as we
live, remain behind us like foliage obstructing our view? To
uproot this foliage, even to thin it out, does not occur to us.
We stride on, leave it behind, and from a distance it is indeed
open to view, but indistinct, shadowy, and all the more enigmatically
entangled.

Commentary and translation stand in the same relation to
the text as style and mimesis to nature: the same phenomenon
considered from different aspects. On the tree of the sacred text
both are only the eternally rustling leaves; on that of the profane,
the seasonally falling fruits.
He who loves is attached not only to the "faults" of the
beloved, not only to the whims and weaknesses of a woman.
Wrinkles in the face, moles, shabby clothes, and a lopsided walk
bind him more lastingly and relentlessly than any beauty. This
has long been known. And why? If the theory is correct that
feeling is not located in the head, that we sentiently experience a
window, a cloud, a tree not in our brains but, rather, in the
place where we see it, then we are, in looking at our beloved,
too, outside ourselves. But in a torment of tension and ravishment.
Our feeling, dazzled, flutters like a flock of birds in the
woman's radiance. And as birds seek refuge in the leafy recesses
of a tree, feelings escape into the shaded wrinkles, the awkward
movements and inconspicuous blemishes of the body we love,
where they can lie low in safety. And no passer-by would guess
that it is just here, in what is defective and censurable, that the
fleeting darts of adoration nestle.

12
Construction Site

Pedantic brooding over the production of objects -- visual aids,
toys, or books-that are supposed to be suitable for children is
folly. Since the Enlightenment this has been one of the mustiest
speculations of the pedagogues. Their infatuation with psychology
keeps them from perceiving that the world is full of the most
unrivalled objects for childish attention and use. And the most
specific. For children are particularly fond of haunting any site
where things are being visibly worked upon. They are irresistibly
drawn by the detritus generated by building, gardening, housework,
tailoring, or carpentry. In waste products they recognize
the face that the world of things turns directly and solely to
them. In using these things they do not so much imitate the
works of adults as bring together, in the artefact produced in
play, materials of widely differing kinds in a new, intuitive
relationship. Children thus produce their own small world of
things within the greater one. The norms of this small world
must be kept in mind if one wishes to create things specially for
children, rather than let one's adult activity, through its
requisites and instruments, find its own way to them.

13
Ministry of the Interior

The more antagonistic a person is toward the traditional order,
the more inexorably he will subject his private life to the norms
that he wishes to elevate as legislators of a future society. It is as
if these laws, nowhere yet realized, placed him under obligation
to enact them in advance at least in the confines of his own
existence. The man, on the other hand, who knows himself to be
in accord with the most ancient heritage of his class or nation
will sometimes bring his private life into ostentatious contrast to
the maxims that he unrelentingly asserts in public, secretly
approving his own behaviour, without the slightest qualms, as
the most conclusive proof of the unshakable authority of the
principles he puts on display. Thus are distinguished the types
of the anarcho-socialist and the conservative politician.

14
Flag . . .

How much more easily the leave-taker is loved! For the flame
burns more purely for those vanishing in the distance, fuelled by
the fleeting scrap of material waving from the ship or railway
window. Separation penetrates the disappearing person like a
pigment and steeps him in gentle radiance.

15
. . . At Half-Mast
If a person very close to us is dying, there is something in the
months to come that we dimly apprehend-much as we should
have liked to share it with him-could only happen through his
absence. We greet him at the last in a language that he no longer
understands.

16
Imperial Panorama

A Tour of German Inflation

1. In the stock of phraseology that lays bare the amalgam of
stupidity and cowardice constituting the mode of life of the
German bourgeois, the locution referring to impending catastrophe --
that "things can't go on like this" -- is particularly
noteworthy. The helpless fixation on notions of security and
property deriving from past decades keeps the average citizen
from perceiving the quite remarkable stabilities of an entirely
new kind that underlie the present situation. Because the relative
stabilization of the prewar years benefited him, he feels
compelled to regard any state that dispossesses him as unstable.
But stable conditions need by no means be pleasant conditions,
and even before the war there were strata for whom stabilized
conditions amounted to stabilized wretchedness. To decline is
no less stable, no more surprising, than to rise. Only a view that
acknowledges downfall as the sole reason for the present situation
can advance beyond enervating amazement at what is daily
repeated, and perceive the phenomena of decline as stability
itself and rescue alone as extraordinary, verging on the marvellous
and incomprehensible. People in the national communities
of Central Europe live like the inhabitants of an encircled
town whose provisions and gunpowder are running out and for
whom deliverance is, by human reasoning, scarcely to be expected --
a case in which surrender, perhaps unconditional,
should be most seriously considered. But the silent, invisible
power that Central Europe feels opposing it does not negotiate.
Nothing, therefore, remains but to direct the gaze, in the perpetual
expectation of the final onslaught, on nothing except the
extraordinary event in which alone salvation now lies. But this
necessary state of intense and uncomplaining attention could,
because we are in mysterious contact with the powers besieging
us, really call forth a miracle. Conversely, the assumption that
things cannot go on like this will one day find itself apprised of
the fact that for the suffering of individuals as of communities
there is only one limit beyond which things cannot go: annihilation.

2. A curious paradox: people have only the narrowest private
interest in mind when they act, yet they are at the same time
more than ever determined in their behaviour by the instincts of
the mass. And more than ever mass instincts have become confused
and estranged from life. Whereas the obscure impulse of
the animal -- as innumerable anecdotes relate -- detects, as danger
approaches, a way of escape that still seems invisible, this
society, each of whose members cares only for his own abject
well-being, falls victim, with animal insensibility but without
the insensate intuition of animals, as a blind mass, to even the
most obvious danger, and the diversity of individual goals is
immaterial in face of the identity of the determining forces.
Again and again it has been shown that society's attachment to
its familiar and long-since-forfeited life is so rigid as to nullify
the genuinely human application of intellect, forethought, even
in dire peril. So that in this society the picture of imbecility is
complete: uncertainty, indeed perversion of vital instincts, and
impotence, indeed decay of the intellect. This is the condition
of the entire German bourgeoisie.

3. All close relationships are lit up by an almost intolerable,
piercing clarity in which they are scarcely able to survive. For
on the one hand, money stands ruinously at the centre of every
vital interest, but on the other, this is the very barrier before
which almost all relationships halt; so, more and more, in the
natural as in the moral sphere, unreflecting trust, calm, and
health are disappearing.

4. Not without reason is it customary to speak of "naked"
want. What is most damaging in the display of it, a practice
started under the dictates of necessity and making visible only a
thousandth part of the hidden distress, is not the pity or the
equally terrible awareness of his own impunity awakened in the
onlooker, but his shame. It is impossible to remain in a large
German city, where hunger forces the most wretched to live on
the bank notes with which passers-by seek to cover an exposure
that wounds them.

5. "Poverty disgraces no man." Well and good. But they disgrace
the poor man. They do it, and then console him with the
little adage. It is one of those that may once have held good but
have long since degenerated. The case is no different with the
brutal, "If a man does not work, neither shall he eat." When
there was work that fed a man, there was also poverty that did
not disgrace him, if it arose from deformity or other misfortune.
But this deprivation, into which millions are born and hundreds
of thousands are dragged by impoverishment, does indeed disgrace.
Filth and misery grow up around them like walls, the
work of invisible hands. And just as a man can endure much in
isolation, but feels justifiable shame when his wife sees him bear
it or suffers it herself, so he may tolerate much as long as he is
alone, and everything as long as he conceals it. But no one may
ever make peace with poverty when it falls like a gigantic
shadow upon his countrymen and his house. Then he must be
alert to every humiliation done to him and so discipline himself
that his suffering becomes no longer the downhill road of grief,
but the rising path of revolt. But of this there is no hope so long
as each blackest, most terrible stroke of fate, daily and even
hourly discussed by the press, set forth in all its illusory causes
and effects, helps no one uncover the dark powers that hold his
life in thrall.

6. To the foreigner cursorily acquainted with the pattern of
German life who has even briefly travelled about the country,
its inhabitants seem no less bizarre than an exotic race. A witty
Frenchman has said: "A German seldom understands himself.
If he has once understood himself, he will not say so. If he says
so, he will not make himself understood." This comfortless distance
was increased by the war, but not merely through the real
and legendary atrocities that Germans are reported to have
committed. Rather, what completes the isolation of Germany
in the eyes of other Europeans, what really engenders the attitude
that they are dealing with Hottentots in the Germans (as
it has been aptly put), is the violence, incomprehensible to outsiders
and wholly imperceptible to those imprisoned by it, with
which circumstances, squalor, and stupidity here subjugate
people entirely to collective forces, as the lives of savages alone
are subjected to tribal laws. The most European of all accomplishments,
that more or less discernible irony with which the
life of the individual asserts the right to run its course independently
of the community into which it is cast, has completely
deserted the Germans.

7. The freedom of conversation is being lost. If it was earlier
a matter of course in conversation to take interest in one's
partner, this is now replaced by inquiry into the price of his
shoes or his umbrella. Irresistibly intruding on any convivial
exchange is the theme of the conditions of life, of money. What
this theme involves is not so much the concerns and sorrows of
individuals, in which they might be able to help one another, as
the overall picture. It is as if one were trapped in a theatre and
had to follow the events on the stage whether one wanted to or
not, had to make them again and again, willingly or unwillingly,
the subject of one's thought and speech.

8. Anyone who does not simply refuse to perceive decline will
hasten to claim a special justification for his own continued
presence, his activity and involvement in this chaos. As there
are many insights into the general failure, so there are many
exceptions for one's own sphere of action, place of residence, and
moment of time. A blind determination to save the prestige of
personal existence, rather than, through an impartial disdain
for its impotence and entanglement, at least to detach it from
the background of universal delusion, is triumphing almost
everywhere. That is why the air is so thick with life theories and
world views, and why in this country they cut so presumptuous
a figure, for almost always they finally serve to sanction some
wholly trivial private situation. For just the same reason the air
is so full of phantoms, mirages of a glorious cultural future breaking
upon us overnight in spite of all, for everyone is committed
to the optical illusions of his isolated standpoint.

9. The people cooped up in this country no longer discern
the contours of human personality. Every free man appears to
them as an eccentric. Let us imagine the peaks of the High Alps
silhouetted not against the sky but against folds of dark drapery.
The mighty forms would show up only dimly. In just this way a
heavy curtain shuts off Germany's sky, and we no longer see the
profiles of even the greatest men.

10. Warmth is ebbing from things. The objects of daily use
gently but insistently repel us. Day by day, in overcoming the
sum of secret resistances -- not only the overt ones -- that they
put in our way, we have an immense labour to perform. We must
compensate for their coldness with our warmth if they are not to
freeze us to death, and handle their spines with infinite dexterity,
if we are not to perish by bleeding. From our fellow men we
should expect no succour. Bus conductors, officials, workmen,
salesmen -- they all feel themselves to be the representatives of a
refractory matter whose menace they take pains to demonstrate
through their own surliness. And in the degeneration of things,
with which, emulating human decay, they punish humanity,
the country itself conspires. It gnaws at us like the things, and
the German spring that never comes is only one of countless
related phenomena of decomposing German nature. Here one
lives as if the weight of the column of air supported by everyone
had suddenly, against all laws, become in these regions
perceptible.

11. Any human movement, whether it springs from an intellectual
or even a natural impulse, is impeded in its unfolding
by the boundless resistance of the outside world. Shortage of
houses and the rising cost of travel are in the process of annihilating
the elementary symbol of European freedom, which
existed in certain forms even in the Middle Ages: freedom of
domicile. And if medieval coercion bound men to natural
associations, they are now chained together in unnatural community.
Few things will further the ominous spread of the cult
of rambling as much as the strangulation of the freedom of
residence, and never has freedom of movement stood in greater
disproportion to the abundance of means of travel.

12. Just as all things, in a perpetual process of mingling and
contamination, are losing their intrinsic character while ambiguity
displaces authenticity, so is the city. Great cities-whose
incomparably sustaining and reassuring power encloses those
at work within them in the peace of a fortress and lifts from
them, with the view of the horizon, awareness of the ever vigilant
elemental forces -- are seen to be breached at all points
by the invading countryside. Not by the landscape, but by what
in untrammelled nature is most bitter: ploughed land, highways,
night sky that the veil of vibrant redness no longer conceals.
The insecurity of even the busy areas puts the city dweller in the
opaque and truly dreadful situation in which he must assimilate,
along with isolated monstrosities from the open country,
the abortions of urban architectonics.

13. Noble indifference to the spheres of wealth and poverty
has quite forsaken manufactured things. Each stamps its owner,
leaving him only the choice of appearing a starveling or a
racketeer. For while even true luxury can be permeated by
intellect and conviviality and so forgotten, the luxury goods
swaggering before us now parade such brazen solidity that all
the mind's shafts break harmlessly on their surface.

14. The earliest customs of peoples seem to send us a warning
that in accepting what we receive so abundantly from nature
we should guard against a gesture of avarice. For we are able to
make Mother Earth no gift of our own. It is therefore fitting to
show respect in taking, by returning a part of all we receive
before laying hands on our share. This respect is expressed in the
ancient custom of the libation. Indeed, it is perhaps this immemorial
practice that has survived, transformed, in the prohibition
on gathering forgotten ears of corn or fallen grapes,
these reverting to the soil or to the ancestral dispensers of
blessings. An Athenian custom forbade the picking up of crumbs
at the table, since they belonged to the heroes. If society has so
degenerated through necessity and greed that it can now receive
the gifts of nature only rapaciously, that it snatches the fruit
unripe from the trees in order to sell it most profitably, and is
compelled to empty each dish in its determination to have
enough, the earth will be impoverished and the land yield bad
harvests.

17
Underground Works

I saw in a dream barren terrain. It was the marketplace at
Weimar. Excavations were in progress. I too scraped about in
the sand. Then the tip of a church steeple came to light.
Delighted, I thought to myself: a Mexican shrine from the time
of pre-animism, from the Anaquivitzli. I awoke laughing.
(Ana = ává; vi = vie; witz [joke] = Mexican church[!].)

18
Coiffeur for Fastidious Ladies

Three thousand ladies and gentlemen from the Kurfürstendamm
are to be arrested in their beds one morning without
explanation and detained for twenty-four hours. At midnight a
questionnaire on the death penalty is distributed to the cells
requiring its signatories to indicate which form of execution,
should the occasion arise, they would prefer. This document
would have to be completed "to the best of their knowledge" by
those who hitherto had merely offered their unsolicited views
"in all conscience". By first light, that hour held sacred of old
but in this country dedicated to the executioner, the question of
capital punishment would be resolved.

19
Caution: Steps

Work on good prose has three steps: a musical stage when it is
composed, an architectonic one when it is built, and a textile
one when it is woven.

20
Attested Auditor of Books

Just as this time is the antithesis of the Renaissance in general, it
contrasts in particular to the situation in which the art of
printing was discovered. For whether by coincidence or not, its
appearance in Germany came at a time when the book in the
most eminent sense of the word, the book of books, had through
Luther's translation become the people's property. Now everything
indicates that the book in this traditional form is nearing
its end. Mallarme, who in the crystalline structure of his certainly
traditionalist writing saw the true image of what was to
come, was in the Coup de dés the first to incorporate the graphic
tensions of the advertisement in the printed page. The typographical
experiments later undertaken by the Dadaists stemmed,
it is true, not from constructive principles but from the
precise nervous reactions of these literati, and were therefore far
less enduring than Mallarme's, which grew out of the inner nature
of his style. But they show up for this very reason the topicality
of what Mallarme, monadically, in his hermetic room, had discovered
through a pre-established harmony with all the decisive
events of our times in economics, technology, and public life.
Printing, having found in the book a refuge in which to lead an
autonomous existence, is pitilessly dragged out onto the street
by advertisements and subjected to the brutal heteronomies of
economic chaos. This is the hard schooling of its new form. If
centuries ago it began gradually to lie down, passing from the
upright inscription to the manuscript resting on sloping desks
before finally taking to bed in the printed book, it now begins
just as slowly to rise again from the ground. The newspaper is
read more in the vertical than in the horizontal plane, while film
and advertisement force the printed word entirely into the
dictatorial perpendicular. And before a child of our time finds
his way clear to opening a book, his eyes have been exposed to
such a blizzard of changing, colourful, conflicting letters that the
chances of his penetrating the archaic stillness of the book are
slight. Locust swarms of print, which already eclipse the sun of
what is taken for intellect for city dwellers, will grow thicker
with each succeeding year. Other demands of business life lead
further. The card index marks the conquest of three-dimensional
writing, and so presents an astonishing counterpoint to the
three-dimensionality of script in its original form as rune or knot
notation. (And today the book is already, as the present mode
of scholarly production demonstrates, an outdated mediation
between two different filing systems. For everything that matters
is to be found in the card box of the researcher who wrote it,
and the scholar studying it assimilates it into his own card index.)
But it is quite beyond doubt that the development of writing
will not indefinitely be bound by the claims to power of a chaotic
academic and commercial activity; rather, quantity is approaching
the moment of a qualitative leap when writing, advancing
ever more deeply into the graphic regions of its new eccentric
figurativeness, will take sudden possession of an adequate factual
content. In this picture writing, poets, who will now as in earliest
times be first and foremost experts in writing, will be able to
participate only by mastering the fields in which (quite unobtrusively)
it is being constructed: the statistical and technical
diagram. With the foundation of an international moving script
they will renew their authority in the life of peoples, and find a
role awaiting them in comparison to which all the innovative
aspirations of rhetoric will reveal themselves as antiquated daydreams.

21
Teaching Aid

Principles of the Weighty Tome, or How to Write Fat Books.

I. The whole composition must be permeated with a protracted
and wordy exposition of the initial plan.

II. Terms are to be included for conceptions that, except in
this definition, appear nowhere in the whole book.

III. Conceptual. distinctions laboriously arrived at in the text
are to be obliterated again in the relevant notes.

IV. For concepts treated only in their general significance,
examples should be given; if, for example, machines are mentioned,
all the different kinds of machines should be enumerated.

V. Everything that is known a priori about an object is to be
consolidated by an abundance of examples.

VI. Relationships that could be represented graphically must
be expounded in words. Instead of being represented in a
genealogical tree, for example, all family relationships are to be
enumerated and described.

VII. A number of opponents all sharing the same argument
should each be refuted individually.

The typical work of modern scholarship is intended to be read
like a catalogue. But when shall we actually write books like
catalogues? If the deficient content were thus to determine the
outward form, an excellent piece of writing would result, in
which the value of opinions would be marked without their
being thereby put on sale.

The typewriter will alienate the hand of the man of letters
from the pen only when the precision of typographic forms has
directly entered the conception of his books. One might suppose
that new systems with more variable typefaces would then be
needed. They will replace the pliancy of the hand with the
innervation of commanding fingers.

A period that, constructed metrically, afterward has its
rhythm upset at a single point yields the finest prose sentence
imaginable. In this way a ray of light falls through a chink in the
wall of the alchemist's cell, to light up gleaming crystals, spheres,
and triangles.

22
Germans, Drink German Beer!

The mob, impelled by a frenetic hatred of the life of the mind,
has found a sure way to annihilate it in the counting of bodies.
Whenever given the slightest opportunity, they form ranks and
advance into artillery barrages and price rises in marching
order. No one sees further than the back before him, and each
is proud to be thus exemplary for the eyes behind. Men have
been adept at this for centuries in the field, but the march-past
of penury, standing in line, is the invention of women.

23
Post No Bills

The Writer's Technique in Thirteen Theses.

I. Anyone intending to embark on a major work should be
lenient with himself and, having completed a stint, deny himself
nothing that will not prejudice the next.

II. Talk about what you have written, by all means, but do
not read from it while the work is in progress. Every gratification
procured in this way will slacken your tempo. If this regime is
followed, the growing desire to communicate will become in the
end a motor for completion.

III. In your working conditions avoid everyday mediocrity.
Semi-relaxation, to a background of insipid sounds, is degrading.
On the other hand, accompaniment by an etude or a cacophony
of voices can become as significant for work as the perceptible
silence of the night. If the latter sharpens the inner ear, the
former acts as touchstone for a diction ample enough to bury
even the most wayward sounds.

IV. Avoid haphazard writing materials. A pedantic adherence
to certain papers, pens, inks is beneficial. No luxury, but an
abundance of these utensils is indispensable.

V. Let no thought pass incognito, and keep your notebook as
strictly as the authorities keep their register of aliens.

VI. Keep your pen aloof from inspiration, which it will then
attract with magnetic power. The more circumspectly you
delay writing down an idea, the more maturely developed it will
be on surrendering itself. Speech conquers thought, but writing
commands it.

VII. Never stop writing because you have run out of ideas.
Literary honour requires that one break off only at an appointed
moment (a mealtime, a meeting) or at the end of the work.

VIII. Fill the lacunae of inspiration by tidily copying out what
is already written. Intuition will awaken in the process.

IX. Nulla dies sine Linea-but there may well be weeks.

X. Consider no work perfect over which you have not once
sat from evening to broad daylight.

XI. Do not write the conclusion of a work in your familiar
study. You would not find the necessary courage there.

XII. Stages of composition: idea-style-writing. The value
of the fair copy is that in producing it you confine attention to
calligraphy. The idea kills inspiration, style fetters the idea,
writing pays off style.

XIII. The work is the death mask of its conception.

Thirteen Theses Against Snobs.
(Snob in the private office of art criticism. On the left, a child's
drawing, on the right a fetish. Snob: "Doesn't this make Picasso
seem such a waste of time?")

I. The artist makes a work. 

The primitive expresses himself in documents.

II. The art-work is only incidentally a document. 

No document is as such a work of art.

III. The art-work is a masterpiece.

The document serves to instruct.

Before documents, a public is educated.

IV. On art-works, artists learn their craft.

Before documents, a public is educated.

V. Art-works are remote from each other in their perfection.

All documents communicate through their subject matter.

VI. In the art-work content and form are one: meanmg.

In documents, the subject matter is wholly dominant.

VII. Meaning is the outcome of experience.

Subject-matter is the outcome of dreams.

VIII. In the art-work subject matter is a ballast jettisoned during contemplation.

The more one loses oneself in a document, the denser the subject matter grows.

IX. In the art-work the formal law is central.

Forms are merely disperesed in documents.

X. The art-work is synthetic: an energy-centre.

The fertility of a document demands: analysis

XI. The impact of an artwork increases with repeated viewing.

A document overpowers only through surprise.

XII. The virility of works lies in assault.

The document's innocence gives it cover.

XIII. The artist sets out to conquer meanmgs.

The primitive man barricades himself behind subject-matter

The Critic's Technique in Thirteen Theses.

I. The critic is the strategist in the literary battle.

II. He who cannot take sides should keep silent.

III. The critic has nothing in common with the interpreter of
past cultural epochs.

IV. Criticism must talk the language of artists. For the terms of
the cénacle are slogans. And only in slogans is the battle-cry heard.

V. "Objectivity" must always be sacrificed to partisanship, if
the cause fought for merits this.

VI. Criticism is a moral question. If Goethe misjudged Holderlin
and Kleist, Beethoven and Jean Paul, his morality and not
his artistic discernment was at fault.

VII. For the critic his colleagues are the higher authority. Not
the public. Still less posterity.

VIII. Posterity forgets or acclaims. Only the critic judges in
face of the author.

IX. Polemics mean to destroy a book in a few of its sentences.
The less it has been studied the better. Only he who can destroy
can criticize.

X. Genuine polemics approach a book as lovingly as a cannibal
spices a baby.

XI. Artistic enthusiasm is alien to the critic. In his hand the
art-work is the shining sword in the battle of minds.

XII. The art of the critic in a nutshell: to coin slogans without
betraying ideas. The slogans of an inadequate criticism peddle
ideas to fashion.

XIII. The public must always be proved wrong, yet always feel
represented by the critic.

24
No. 13

Treize -- j'eus un plaisir cruel de m'arrêter sur ce nombre. [Thirteen -- stopping
at this number, I felt a cruel pleasure.
Marcel Proust

Le reploiement vierge du livre, encore, prête a un sacrifice dont saigna la
tranche rouge des anciens tomes; l'introduction d'une arme, ou coupepapier,
pour établir la prise de possession. [The tight-folded book,
virginal still, awaiting the sacrifice that blooded the red edges
of earlier tomes; the insertion of a weapon, or paper-knife, to
effect the taking of possession.]
Mallarme

I. Books and harlots can be taken to bed.

II. Books and harlots interweave time. They command night as
day, and day as night.

III. Neither books nor harlots show that minutes are precious
to them. But closer acquaintance shows what a hurry they are in.
As our interest becomes absorbed, they too are counting.

IV. Books and harlots have ever been unhappily in love with
each other.

V. Books and harlots -- both have their type of man, who both
lives off and harasses them. In the case of books, critics.

VI. Books and harlots are public establishments -- for students.

VII. Books and harlots -- seldom does one who has possessed
them witness their end. They are apt to vanish before they
expire.

VIII. Books and harlots are fond of recounting, mendaciously,
how they became what they are. In reality they did not often
notice it themselves. For years one follows "the heart" wherever
it leads, and one day a corpulent body stands soliciting on the
spot where one had lingered merely to "study life".

IX. Books and harlots love to turn their backs when putting
themselves on show.

X. Books and harlots have a large progeny.

XI. Books and harlots -- "Old bigots-young whores". How
many books were once notorious that now serve as instruction
for youth.

XII. Books and harlots have their quarrels in public.

XIII. Books and harlots -- footnotes in one are as banknotes in
the stockings of the other.

25
ORDNANCE

I had arrived in Riga to visit a woman friend. Her house, the
town, the language were unfamiliar to me. Nobody was expecting
me, no one knew me. For two hours I walked the streets in
solitude. Never again have I seen them so. From every gate a
flame darted, each cornerstone sprayed sparks, and every streetcar
came toward me like a fire engine. For she might have
stepped out of the gateway, around the corner, been sitting in
the streetcar. But of the two of us I had to be, at any price, the
first to see the other. For had she touched me with the match of
her eyes, I should have gone up like a magazine.

26
First Aid

A highly embroiled quarter, a network of streets that I had
avoided for years, was disentangled at a single stroke when one
day a person dear to me moved there. It was as if a searchlight
set up at this person's window dissected the area with pencils of
light.

27
Interior Decoration

The tract is an Arabic form. Its exterior is undifferentiated and
unobtrusive, like the facades of Arabian buildings, the articulation
of which begins only in the courtyard. So, too, the articulated
structure of the tract is invisible from outside, revealing
itself only from within. If it is formed by chapters, they have not
verbal headings but numbers. The surface of its deliberations is
not pictorially enlivened, but covered with unbroken, proliferating
arabesques. In the ornamental density of this presentation
the distinction between thematic and excursive expositions
is abolished.

28
Stationers

Street-plan. -- I know one who is absent-minded. Whereas the
names of my suppliers, the location of my documents, the
addresses ofmy friends and acquaintances, the hour of a rendezvous 
are at my finger-tips, in her political concepts, party
slogans, declarations and commands are firmly lodged. She
lives in a city of watchwords and inhabits a quarter of conspiratorial
and fraternal terms, where every alleyway shows its
colour and every word has a password for its echo.

List of wishes. -- "Does not the reed the world -- With sweetness
fill -- May no less gracious word-Flow from my quill!" This
follows "Blessed Yearning" like a pearl that has rolled from a
freshly-opened oyster-shell.

Pocket diary. -- Few things are more characteristic of the Nordic
man than that, when in love, he must above all and at all costs
be alone with himself, must first contemplate, enjoy his feeling
in solitude, before going to the woman to declare it.

Paper-weight. -- Place de la Concorde: the Obelisk. What was
carved in it four thousand years ago today stands at the centre
in the greatest of city squares. Had that been foretold to him what
a triumph for the Pharaoh! The foremost Western cultural
empire will one day bear at its centre the memorial of his rule.
How does this apotheosis appear in reality? Not one among the
tens of thousands who pass by pauses; not one among the tens of
thousands who pause can read the inscription. In such manner
does all fame redeem its pledges, and no oracle can match its
guile. For the immortal stands like this obelisk: regulating the
spiritual traffic that surges thunderously about him, and the
inscription he bears helps no one.

29
Fancy Goods

The incomparable language of the death's head: total expressionlessness --
the black of the eye-sockets-coupled to the most
unbridled expression -- the grinning rows of teeth.

Someone who, feeling himself abandoned, takes up a book,
finds with a pang that the page he is about to turn is already cut,
and that even here he is not needed.

Gifts must affect the receiver to the point of shock.

When a valued, cultured and elegant friend sent me his new
book and I was about to open it, I caught myself in the act of
straightening my tie.

He who observes etiquette but objects to lying is like someone
who dresses fashionably but wears no vest.

If the smoke from the tip of my cigarette and the ink from the
nib of my pen flowed with equal ease, I should be in the Arcadia
of my writing.

To be happy is to be able to become aware of oneself without
fright.

30
Enlargements

Child reading. -- You are given a book from the school library. In
the lower classes they are simply handed out. Only now and
again do you dare to express a wish. Often, in envy, you see
coveted books pass into other hands. At last desire was granted.
For a week you were wholly given up to the soft drift of the text,
that surrounded you as secretly, densely and unceasingly as
snowflakes. You entered it with limitless trust. The peacefulness
of the book that enticed you further and further! Its contents
did not much matter. For you were reading at the time when
you still made up stories in bed. The child seeks his way along
the half-hidden paths. Reading, he covers his ears; the book is
on a table that is far too high, and one hand is always on the
page. To him the hero's adventures can still be read in the
swirling letters like figures and messages in drifting snowflakes.
His breath is part of the air of the events narrated, and all the
participants breathe with his life. He mingles with the characters
far more closely than grown-ups do. He is unspeakably
touched by the deeds, the words that are exchanged, and, when
he gets up, is blanched over and over by the snow of his reading.

Belated child. -- The clock over the school playground seems as if
damaged on his account. The hands stand at: "Late". And in
the corridor, from classroom doors as he passes, come murmurs
of conspiracy. The teachers and pupils behind them are friends.
Or all is silent, as if they were waiting. Inaudibly he puts his
hand to the doorhandle. The spot where he stands is steeped in
sunlight. Violating the peaceful hour he opens the door. The
teacher's voice clatters like a mill-wheel; he stands before the
grinding stones. The voice clatters on without a break, but the
mill-hands now shake off their load to the newcomer; ten,
twenty heavy sacks fly towards him, that he must carry to the
bench. Each thread of his jacket is flour-white. Like those of a
wretched soul at midnight, his every step makes uproar, and
no one sees. Once arrived at his seat, he works quietly with the
rest until the bell sounds. But it avails him nothing.

Pilfering child. -- Through the chink of the scarcely open larder
door his hand advances like a lover through the night. Once at
home in the darkness, it gropes towards sugar or almonds, sultanas
or preserves. And as the lover, before kissing her, embraces
his girl, his hand enjoys a tactile tryst with the comestibles
before his mouth savours their sweetness. How invitingly honey,
heaps of currants, even rice yield to his hand. How passionate
this meeting of two who have at last escaped the spoon. Grateful
and tempestuous as one who has been abducted from the
parental home, strawberry jam, unencumbered by bread rolls,
abandons itself to his delectation as under the open sky, and
even the butter responds tenderly to the boldness of this wooer
who has penetrated her boudoir. His hand, the juvenile Don
Juan, has soon invaded all the cells and spaces, leaving behind
it running layers and streaming plenty: maidenliness renewing
itself without complaint.

Child on the roundabout. -- The board carrying the docile animals
moves close to the ground. It is at the height which, in dreams,
is best for flying. Music starts and the child moves with a jerk
away from his mother. First he is afraid at leaving her. But then
he notices how doughty he himself is. He is ensconced as the just
ruler over a world that belongs to him. Tangential trees and
natives line his way. Then, in an Orient, his mother reappears.
Next, emerging from the jungle, comes a treetop, exactly as the
child saw it thousands of years ago -- just now on the roundabout.
His beast is devoted: like a mute Arion he rides his silent fish, or
a wooden Zeus-bull carries him off as an immaculate Europa.
The eternal recurrence of all things has long become child's
wisdom to him, and life a primeval frenzy of domination, with
the booming orchestrion as the crown jewels at the centre. As
the music slows, space begins to stammer and the trees to rub
their brows. The roundabout becomes uncertain ground. And
his mother appears, the much-rammed stake about which the
landing child winds the rope of his gaze.

Untidy child. -- Each stone he finds, each flower picked and each
butterfly caught is already the start of a collection, and every
single thing he owns makes up one great collection. In him this
passion shows its true face, the stern Indian expression which
lingers on, but with a dimmed and manic glow, in antiquarians,
researchers, bibliomaniacs. Scarcely has he entered life than he
is a hunter. He hunts the spirits whose trace he scents in things;
between spirits and things years are passed in which his field of
vision remains free of people. His life is like a dream: he knows
nothing lasting; everything seemingly happens to him by
chance. His nomad-years are hours in the forest of dream. To it
he drags home his booty, to purify it, secure it, cast out its spell.
His drawers must become arsenal and zoo, crime museum and
crypt. "To tidy up" would be to demolish an edifice full of
prickly chestnuts that are spiky clubs, tinfoil that is hoarded
silver, bricks that are coffins, cacti that are totem-poles and
copper pennies that are shields. The child has long since helped
at his mother's linen-cupboard, his father's bookshelves, while
in his own domain he is still a sporadic, warlike visitor.

Child hiding. -- He already knows all the hiding places in the
apartment and returns to them as to a house where everything
is sure to be just as it was. His heart pounds, he holds his breath.
Here he is enclosed in the world of matter. It becomes immensely
distinct, speechlessly obtrusive. In such manner does a man who
is being hanged become aware of the reality of rope and wood.
Standing behind the doorway curtain, the child becomes himself
something floating and white, a ghost. The dining table
under which he is crouching turns him into the wooden idol in a
temple whose four pillars are the carved legs. And behind a
door he is himself door, wears it as his heavy mask and as a
shaman will bewitch all those who unsuspectingly enter. At no
cost must he be found. When he pulls faces, he is told, the clock
need only strike and he will remain so. The element of truth in
this he finds out in his hiding place. Anyone who discovers him
can petrify him as an idol under the table, weave him forever
as a ghost into the curtain, banish him for life into the heavy
door. And so, at the seeker's touch he drives out with a loud cry
the demon who has so transformed him -- indeed, without waiting
for the moment of discovery, he grabs the hunter with a
shout of self-deliverance. That is why he does not tire of the
struggle with the demon. In this struggle the apartment is the
arsenal of his masks. Yet once each year, in mysterious places, in
their empty eye-sockets, their fixed mouths, presents lie. Magic
discovery becomes science. As its engineer the child disenchants
the gloomy parental apartment and looks for Easter eggs.


31
Antiques

Medallion. -- ln everything that is with reason called beautiful,
appearance has a paradoxical effect.

Prayer-wheel. -- Only images in the mind vitalize the will. The
mere word, by contrast, at most inflames it, to leave it smouldering,
blasted. There is no intact will without exact pictorial
imagination. No imagination without innervation. Now breathing
is the latter's most delicate regulator. The sound of formulae
is a canon of such breathing. Hence the practice of meditating
Yoga, which breathes in accord with the holy syllables. Hence
its omnipotence.

Antique spoon. -- One thing is reserved to the greatest epic writers:
the capacity to feed their heroes.

Old map. -- In a love affair most seek an eternal homeland.
Others, but very few, eternal voyaging. These latter are melancholics,
for whom contact with mother earth is to be shunned.
They seek the person who will keep far from them the homeland's
sadness. To that person they remain faithful. The
medieval complexion-books understood the yearning of this
human type for long journeys.

Fan. -- The following experience will be familiar: if one is in
love, or just intensely preoccupied with another, his portrait
will appear in almost every book. Moreover, he appears as both
protagonist and antagonist. In stories, novels, and novellas he
is encountered in endless metamorphoses. And from this it follows
that the faculty of imagination is the gift of interpolating
into the infinitely small, of inventing, for every intensity, an
extensiveness to contain its new, compressed fullness, in short,
of receiving each image as if it were that of the folded fan, which
only in spreading draws breath and flourishes, in its new expanse,
the beloved features within it.

Relief -- One is with the woman one loves, speaks with her.
Then, weeks or months later, separated from her, one thinks
again of what was talked of then. And now the motif seems
banal, tawdry, shallow, and one realizes that it was she alone,
bending low over it with love, who shaded and sheltered it
before us, so that the thought was alive in all its folds and
crevices like a relief. Alone, as now, we see it lie flat, bereft of
comfort and shadow, in the light of our knowledge.

Torso. -- Only he who can view his own past as an abortion
sprung from compulsion and need can use it to full advantage in
the present. For what one has lived is at best comparable to a
beautiful statue which has had all its limbs knocked off in
transit, and now yields nothing but the precious block out of
which the image of one's future must be hewn.


32
Watchmaker and Jeweller

He who, awake and dressed, perhaps while hiking, witnesses the
sunrise, preserves all day before others the serenity of one invisibly
crowned, and he who sees daybreak while working feels
at midday as if he has himself placed this crown upon his head.

Like a clock of life on which the seconds race, the pagenumber
hangs over the characters in a novel. Which reader has
not once lifted to it a fleeting, fearful glance?

I dreamt that I was walking -- a newly-hatched private tutor
 -- conversing collegially with Roethe, through the spacious
rooms of a museum whose curator he was. While he talks in an
adjoining room with an employee, I go up to a glass showcase.
In it, besides other lesser objects, stands a metallic or enamelled,
dully shining, almost life-size bust of a woman, not dissimilar to
Leonardo's Flora in the Berlin Museum. The mouth of this
golden head is open, and over the lower teeth jewellery, partly
hanging from the mouth, is spread at measured intervals. I was
in no doubt that this was a clock. -- (Dream-motifs: blushing
[Scham-Roethe]; Morgenstunde hat Gold im Munde [German
saying: the morning hour has gold in its mouth, i.e. "the early
bird catches the worm" -- tr.]; "La tête, avec l'amas de sa crinière
sombre / Et de ses bijoux preciéux, / Sur la table de nuit, comme une
renoncule,/Repose". [The head, heaped with its dark mane and
precious jewels, rests on the night-table like a ranunculus.]
Baudelaire.)


33
Arc Lamp

The only way of knowing a person is to love them without hope.


34
Loggia

Geranium. -- Two people who are in love are attached above all
else to their names.

Carthusian pink. -- To the lover the loved one appears always as
solitary.

Asphodel. -- Behind someone who is loved, the abyss of sexuality
closes like that of the family.

Cactus bloom. -- The truly loving person delights in finding the
beloved, arguing, in the wrong.

Forget-me-not. -- Memory always sees the loved one smaller.

Foliage plant. -- Should an obstacle prevent union, at once the
fantasy of a contented, shared old age is at hand.


35
Lost-Property Office

Articles lost. -- What makes the very first glimpse of a village, a
town, in the landscape so incomparable and irretrievable is the
rigorous connection between foreground and distance. Habit
has not yet done its work. As soon as we begin to find our bearings,
the landscape vanishes at a stroke like the façade of a
house as we enter it. It has not yet gained preponderance
through a constant exploration that has become habit. Once
we begin to find our way about, that earliest picture can never
be restored.

Articles found. -- The blue distance that never gives way to foreground
or dissolves at our approach, which is not revealed
spread-eagle and long-winded when reached but only looms
more compact and threatening, is the painted distance of a
backdrop. It is what gives stage sets their incomparable
atmosphere.


36
Halt for not More Than Three Cabs

I stood for ten minutes waiting for an omnibus. "L'Intran ...
Paris-Soir ... La Liberte", a newspaper vendor called incessantly
in an unvarying tone behind me. "L'lntran ... ParisSoir
... La Liberté" -- a three-cornered cell in a hard-labour
prison. I saw before me how bleak the corners were.
I saw in a dream "a house of ill repute". "A hotel in which an
animal is spoiled. Practically everyone drinks only spoiled
animal-water." I dreamt in these words and at once woke with
a start. Through excessive fatigue I had thrown myself on my
bed in my clothes in the brightly-lit room, and had at once, for
a few seconds, fallen asleep.
There is in tenement blocks a music of such deathly-sad
wantonness that one cannot believe it to be for the player: it is
music for the furnished rooms where on Sundays someone sits
in thoughts that are soon garnished with these notes like a bowl
of over-ripe fruit with withered leaves.


37
Monument To a Warrior

Karl Kraus. -- Nothing more desolating than his acolytes, nothing
more god-forsaken than his adversaries. No name that would be
more fittingly honoured by silence. In ancient armour, wrathfully
grinning, a Chinese idol, brandishing drawn swords in
each hand, he dances a war-dance before the burial vault of the
German language. He, "merely one of the epigones that live in
the old house of language", has become the sealer of its tomb.
In day and night watches he endures. No post was ever more
loyally held, and none ever was more hopelessly lost. Here stands
one who fetches water from the tear-seas of his contemporaries
like a Danaide, and from whose hands the rock which is to bury
his enemies rolls like that of Sisyphus. What more helpless than
his conversion? What more powerless than his humanity? What
more hopeless than his battle with the press? What does he
know of the powers that are his true allies? But what vision of the
new seers bears comparison with the listening of this shaman,
whose utterances even a defunct language inspires? Who ever
conjured up a spirit as Kraus did in the "Forsaken", as if
"Blessed Yearning" had never been composed? Helpless as only
spirits' voices are when summoned up, a murmur from the
chthonic depths of language is the source of his soothsaying.
Every sound is incomparably genuine, but they all leave us
bewildered like messages from the beyond. Blind like the manes
language calls him to vengeance, as narrow-minded as spirits
that know only the voice of the blood, who care not what havoc
they wreak in the realm of the living. But he cannot err. Their
commands are infallible. Whoever tries his arm with him is
condemned already: in this mouth the adversary's name itself
becomes a judgement. When his lips part, the colourless flame
of wit darts forth. And none who walks the paths of life would
come upon him. On an archaic field of honour, a gigantic battleground
of bloody labour, he rages before a deserted sepulchre.
The honours at his death will be immeasurable, and the last that
are bestowed.


38
Fire Alarm

The notion of the class war can be misleading. It does not refer
to a trial of strength to decide the question "Who shall win, who
be defeated?", or to a struggle the outcome of which is good for
the victor and bad for the vanquished. To think in this way is to
romanticize and obscure the facts. For whether the bourgeoisie
wins or loses the fight, it remains doomed by the inner contradictions
that in the course of development will become deadly.
The only question is whether its downfall will come through
itself or through the proletariat. The continuance or the end of
three thousand years of cultural development will be decided by
the answer. History knows nothing of the evil infinity contained
in the image of the two wrestlers locked in eternal combat. The
true politician reckons only in dates. And if the abolition of the
bourgeoisie is not completed by an almost calculable moment in
economic and technical development ( a moment signalled by
inflation and poison-gas warfare), all is lost. Before the spark
reaches the dynamite, the lighted fuse must be cut. The interventions,
dangers, and tempi of politicians are technical -- not
chivalrous.


39
Travel Souvenirs

Atrani. -- The gently rising, curved baroque staircase leading to
the church. The railing behind the church. The litanies of the
old women at the "Ave Maria": preparing to die first-class. If
you turn around, the church verges like God Himself on the sea.
Each morning the Christian Era crumbles the rock, but between
the walls below, the night falls always into the four old Roman
quarters. Alleyways like air shafts. A well in the market-place. In
the late afternoon women about it. Then, in solitude: archaic
plashing.

Navy. -- The beauty of the tall sailing ships is unique. Not only
has their outline remained unchanged for centuries, but also
they appear in the most immutable landscape: at sea, silhouetted
against the horizon.

Versailles Façade. -- It is as if this château had been forgotten where
hundreds of years ago it was placed Par Ordre du Roi for only two
hours as the movable scenery for a féerie. Of its splendour it keeps
none for itself, giving it undivided to that royal condition which
it concludes. Before this backdrop it becomes a stage on which
the tragedy of absolute monarchy was performed as an allegorical
ballet. Yet today it is only the wall in the shade of which
one seeks to enjoy the prospect into blue distance created by
Le Notre.

Heidelberg Castle. -- Ruins jutting into the sky can appear doubly
beautiful on clear days when, in their windows or above their
contours, the gaze meets passing clouds. Through the transient
spectacle it opens in the sky, destruction reaffirms the eternity
of these fallen stones.

Seville, Alcazar. -- An architecture that follows fantasy's first
impulse. It is undeflected by practical considerations. These
rooms provide only for dreams and festivities, their consummation.
Here dance and silence become the leitmotifs, since all
human movement is absorbed by the soundless tumult of the
ornament.

Marseilles, Cathedral. -- On the least frequented, sunniest square
stands the cathedral. This place is deserted, despite the proximity
at its feet of La Joliette, the harbour, to the south, and a
proletarian district to the north. As a reloading point for
intangible, unfathomable goods, the bleak building stands
between quay and warehouse. Nearly forty years were spent on
it. But when all was complete, in 1893, place and time had conspired
victoriously in this monument against its architects and
sponsors, and the wealth of the clergy had given rise to a gigantic
railway station that could never be opened to traffic. The
façade gives an indication of the waiting rooms within, where
passengers of the first to fourth classes (though before God they
are all equal), wedged among their spiritual possessions as
between cases, sit reading hymnbooks that, with their concordances
and cross references, look very much like international
timetables. Extracts from the railway traffic regulations in the
form of pastoral letters hang on the walls, tariffs for the discount
on special trips in Satan's luxury train are consulted, and
cabinets where the long-distance traveller can discreetly wash
are kept in readiness as confessionals. This is the Marseilles
religion station. Sleeping cars to eternity depart from here at
Mass times.


Freiburg Minster. -- The special sense of a town is formed in part
for its inhabitants -- and perhaps even in the memory of the
traveller who has stayed there-by the timbre and intervals
with which its tower-clocks begin to chime.

Moscow, St Basil's. -- What the Byzantine madonna carries on
her arm is only a life-size wooden doll. Her expression of pain
before a Christ whose childhood remains only suggested, represented,
is more intense than any she could display with a
realistic image of a boy.

Boscotrecase. -- The distinction of the stone-pine forest: its roof is
formed without interlacements.

Naples, Museo Nazionale. -- Archaic statues offer in their smiles
the consciousness of their bodies to the onlooker, as a child holds
out to us freshly picked flowers untied and unarranged; later
art laces its expressions more tightly, like the adult who binds
the lasting bouquet with cutting grasses.

Florence, Baptistry. -- On the portal the "Spes" by Andrea de
Pisano. Sitting, she helplessly stretches her arms for a fruit that
remains beyond her reach. And yet she is winged. Nothing is
more true.

Sky. -- As I stepped from a house in a dream the night sky met
my eyes. It shed intense radiance. For in this plenitude of stars
the images of the constellations stood sensuously present. A
Lion, a Maiden, a Scale and many others shone lividly down,
dense clusters of stars, upon the earth. No moon was to be seen.



40
Optician

In summer fat people are conspicuous, in winter thin.

In spring attention is caught, in bright sunshine, by the young
foliage, in cold rain by the still leafless branches.

How a convivial evening has passed can be seen by someone
remaining behind from the disposition of plates and cups,
glasses and food, at a glance.

First principle of wooing: to make oneself sevenfold; to place
oneself sevenfold about the woman who is desired.
In the eyes we see people to the lees.


41
Toys

Cut-out models. -- Booths have put in like rocking craft to both
sides of the stone jetty on which the people jostle. There are
sailing vessels with high masts from which hang pennants,
steamers with smoke rising from their funnels, barges that keep
their cargoes long stowed. Among them are ships into which
one vanishes; only men are admitted, but through hatchways
you can see women's arms, veils, peacock-feathers. Elsewhere
exotic people stand on the deck apparently trying to frighten
the public away with eccentric music. But with what indifference
is it not received. You climb up hesitantly, with a
broad rolling gait as on ships' stairways, and as long as you are
aloft you realize that the whole is cut off from the shore. Those
who re-emerge from below, taciturn and benumbed, have seen,
on red scales where dyed alcohol rises and falls, their own
marriage come into being and cease to be; the yellow man who
began wooing at the foot of this scale, at the top of it deserted his
blue wife. In mirrors they have seen the floor melt away beneath
their feet like water, and stumbled into the open on rolling
stairways. Into the quarter the fleet has brought unrest: the
women and girls on board have brazen airs, and everything
edible has been taken aboard in the land of idle luxury. One is
so totally cut off by the ocean that everything is encountered
here as if at once for the first and the last time. Sea-lions, dwarfs
and dogs are preserved as in an ark. Even the railway has been
brought in once and for all, and circulates endlessly through a
tunnel. For a few days the quarter has become the port of a
south-sea island, its inhabitants savages swooning in covetous
wonderment before the things that Europe tosses at their feet.

Targets. -- The landscapes of shooting-ranges in fairground
booths ought to be described collectively as a corpus. There is,
for example, a polar waste against which are set bundles of
white clay-pipes, the targets, radiating like spokes. Behind this,
and before an unarticulated strip of woodland, two foresters are
painted, while right at the front, in the manner of movable
scenery, are two sirens with provocative breasts in oil colours.
Elsewhere pipes bristle from the hair of women who are seldom
painted with skirts, usually in tights. Or they protrude from a
fan they spread in their hands. Moving pipes revolve slowly in
the further regions of the clay-pigeon booths. Other stands
present theatricals directed by the spectator with his rifle. If he
hits the bull's-eye the performance starts. On one occasion there
were thirty-six such boxes and above the stage of each was
written what they held in store: "Jeanne d' Arc en prison",
"L'hospitalité", "Les rues de Paris". On another booth: "Exécution
capitale". In front of the closed gate a guillotine, a judge in a
black robe and a priest holding a crucifix. If the shot hits the
mark the gate opens and a board is extended on which the
miscreant stands between two policemen. He places his neck
automatically under the blade and is decapitated. In the same
way: "Les délices du mariage". A penurious interior opens. The
father is seen in the middle of the room holding a child on his
knee and with his free hand rocking a cradle containing another.
"L' Enfer" -- when its gates part a devil is seen tormenting a
wretched soul. Next to him another is dragging a priest towards
a cauldron in which the damned must stew. "Le bagne" ["clink"]
-- a door with a gaoler in front of it. When the target is hit he
pulls a bell-cord. The bell rings, the door opens. Two convicts
are seen manhandling a big wheel. They seem to have to turn it.
Yet another constellation: a fiddler with his dancing bear.
When you shoot successfully the bow moves. The bear beats a
drum with his paw and lifts one leg. One thinks of the fairy-tale
of the brave little tailor, and could also imagine Sleeping Beauty
awakened with a shot, Snow White freed of the apple by a shot
or Little Red Riding-Hood released by a shot. The shot breaks
in magically upon the existences of the puppets with that
curative power that hews the heads from monsters and reveals
them to be princesses. As is the case with the great door without
an inscription: if you have hit the mark it opens and before red
plush curtains stands a Moor who seems to bow slightly. He
holds in front of him a golden bowl. On it lie three fruit. The
first opens and a tiny person stands inside it and bows. In the
second two equally diminutive puppets revolve in a dance. (The
third did not open.) Below, in front of the table on which the
remaining scenery stands, a small horseman with the inscription:
"Route minée". If you hit the bull's-eye there is a bang and
the rider somersaults with his horse, but stays -- needless to say -- in
the saddle.

Stereoscope. -- Riga. The daily market, a huddling city of low
wooden booths, stretches along the jetty, a broad, dirty stone
embankment without warehouse buildings, by the waters of the
Dvina. Small steamers, often showing no more than their
funnels above the quay wall, have put in at the blackish dwarftown.
(The larger ships are moored downstream.) Grimy boards
are the clay-grey foundation on which, glowing in the cold air,
sparse colours melt. At some corners there stand all the year
round, alongside huts for fish, meat, boots and clothes, petty bourgeois
women with the coloured paper rods that penetrate
as far as the West only at Christmas-time. Like being scolded
by the most-loved voice -- such are these rods. For a few coppers
multi-coloured chastising switches. At the end of the jetty,
fenced off and only thirty paces from the water, are the red-and-white
mounds of the apple-market. The apples on sale are
packed in straw, those sold lie without straw in the housewives'
baskets. A dark-red church rises beyond, outshone in the fresh
November air by the cheeks of the apples. -- Several shops for
boating-tackle in small houses near the jetty. Ropes are painted
on them. Everywhere you see wares depicted on signboards or
on house-walls. One shop in the town has cases and belts larger
than life on its bare brick walls. A low corner-house with a shop
for corsets and millinery is decorated with ladies' faces complete
with finery, and severe bodices painted on a yellow-ochre
ground. Protruding from it at an angle is a lantern with similar
pictures on its glass panes. The whole is like the façade of a
fantasy-brothel. Another house, likewise not far from the harbour,
has sugar-sacks and coal in grey and black relief on a grey
wall. Somewhere else shoes rain from horns of plenty. Ironmongery
is painted in detail, hammers, cogs, pliers and the
tiniest screws on one board that looks like a page from an outmoded 
child's painting-book. With such pictures the town is
permeated. Between them, however, rise tall, fortress-like
desolate buildings evoking all the terrors of Tsarism.

Not for sale. -- A mechanical cabinet at the fair at Lucca. The
exhibition is accommodated in a long symmetrically-divided
tent. A few steps lead up to it. The signboard shows a table with
a few motionless puppets. You enter the tent by the right-hand
opening and leave it by the left. In the bright interior two tables
extend towards the back. They touch with their inner edges so
that only a narrow space is left to walk round them. Both tables
are low and glass-covered. On them stand the puppets (twenty
to twenty-five centimetres high on average), while in their lower
concealed part the clockwork that drives them ticks audibly.
A narrow raised board for children runs along the sides of the
tables. There are distorting mirrors on the walls. -- Next to the
entrance princely personages are to be seen. Each of them
makes a particular gesture: one a spacious, inviting movement
with the right or left arm, another a swivelling of his glassy eyes;
some roll their eyes and move their arms at the same time.
Franz Joseph stands there, Pius IX, enthroned and flanked by
two cardinals, Queen Elena of Italy, the Sultaness, Wilhelm I
on horseback, a small Napoleon III and an even smaller Victor
Emmanuel as Crown Prince. Biblical figurines follow, then the
Passion. Herod orders the slaughter of the infants with manifold
movements of the head. He opens his mouth wide while nodding,
extends and lets fall his arm. Two executioners stand before him,
one free-wheeling with a cutting sword, a decapitated child
under his arm, the other, on the point of stabbing, stands
motionless but for his rolling eyes. And two mothers are there:
one endlessly and gently shaking her head like a depressive, the
other raising her arms slowly, beseechingly. -- The nailing to the
cross. It lies on the ground. The hirelings hammer in the nails.
Christ nods. -- Christ crucified, slaked by the sponge of vinegar,
which a soldier offers him in slow jerks and then instantly withdraws.
Each time the Saviour slightly raises his chin. From
behind an angel bends over the cross with a chalice for blood,
holds it in front of the body and then, as if it were filled, removes
it. -- The other table shows genre pictures. Gargantua with
dumplings. In front of a plate he shovels them into his mouth
with both hands, alternately lifting his left arm and his right.
Each hand holds a fork on which a dumpling is impaled. -- An
Alpine maiden spinning. -- Two monkeys playing violins.-A
magician has two barrel-like containers in front of him. The one
on the right opens, and the top half of a lady's body emerges.
The one on the left opens: from it rises half-length a man's body.
Again the right-hand container opens and now a ram's skull
appears with the lady's face between its horns. Then on the left
a monkey presents itself instead of the man. Then it all starts
again from the beginning. -- Another magician: he has a table
in front of him on which he holds beakers upside-down in each
hand. Under them, as he alternately lifts one then the other,
appears now a loaf or an apple, now a flower or a die. -- The
magic well: a farm-boy stands head-shaking at a well. A girl
draws water and the unfaltering thick stream of glass runs from
the well-mouth. -- The enchanted lovers: a golden bush or a
golden flame parts in two wings. Within are seen two puppets.
They turn their faces towards each other and then away, as if
looking at each other in confused astonishment. -- Below each
figure a small label. The whole dating back to 1862.



42
Polyclinic

The author lays his idea on the marble table of the cafe. Lengthy
meditation, for he makes use of the time before the arrival of his
glass, the lens through which he examines the patient. Then,
deliberately, he unpacks his instruments: fountain pens, pencil,
and pipe. The numerous clientele, arranged as in an amphitheatre,
make up his clinical audience. Coffee, carefully poured
and consumed, puts the idea under chloroform. What this idea
may be has no more connection with the matter at hand than
the dream of an anaesthetized patient with the surgical intervention.
With the cautious lineaments of handwriting the
operator makes incisions, displaces internal accents, cauterizes
proliferations of words, inserts a foreign term as a silver rib. At
last the whole is finely stitched together with punctuation, and
he pays the waiter, his assistant, in cash.



43
This Space for Rent

Fools lament the decay of criticism. For its day is long past.
Criticism is a matter of correct distancing. It was at home in a
world where perspectives and prospects counted and where it
was still possible to take a standpoint. Now things press too
closely on human society. The "unclouded", "innocent" eye
has become a lie, perhaps the whole naïve mode of expression
sheer incompetence. Today the most real, the mercantile gaze
into the heart of things is the advertisement. It abolishes the 
space where contemplat10n moved and all but hits us between 
the eyes with things as a car, growing to gigantic proportions,
careens at us out of a film screen. And just as the film does not
present furniture and façades in completed forms for critical
inspection, their insistent, jerky nearness alone being sensational,
the genuine advertisement hurtles things at us with the
tempo of a good film. Thereby "matter-of-factness" is finally
dispatched, and in face of the huge images across the walls of
houses, where toothpaste and cosmetics lie handy for giants,
sentimentality is restored to health and liberated in American
style, just as people whom nothing moves or touches any longer
are taught to cry again by films. For the man in the street, however,
it is money that affects him in this way, brings him into
perceived contact with things. And the paid critic, manipulating
paintings in the dealer's exhibition room, knows more important
if not better things about them than the art lover viewing
them in the showroom window. The warmth of the subject is
communicated to him, stirs sentient springs. What, in the end,
makes advertisements so superior to criticism? Not what the
moving red neon sign says -- but the fiery pool reflecting it in the
asphalt.



44
Office Equipment

The boss's room bristles with weapons. The apparent comfort
that disarms those entering is in reality a hidden arsenal. A
telephone on the desk shrills at every moment. It interrupts you
at the most important point and gives your opponent time to
contrive an answer. Meanwhile snatches of conversation show
how many matters are dealt with here that are more important
than the one under discussion. You think this to yourself, and
slowly start to retreat from your position. You begin to wonder
who it is they are talking about, and hear with a fright that your
interlocutor is leaving tomorrow for Brazil; soon you are so
much at one with the firm that you regret the migraine he complains
of on the telephone as a disturbance of business (rather
than welcoming it as an opportunity). Summoned or unsummoned
the secretary enters. She is very pretty. And if her
employer is either proof against her charms or else has long
clarified his position as her admirer, the newcomer will glance
over at her more than once; and she knows how to turn this to
advantage with her boss. His personnel are in motion producing
card-indexes in which the visitor knows himself to be entered
under various rubrics. He starts to tire. The other, with the light
behind him, reads this off the dazzlingly illuminated face with
satisfaction. The armchair too does its work; you sit in it tilted
as far back as at the dentist's, and so finally accept this discomfiting
procedure as the legitimate state of affairs. This
treatment, too, is followed sooner or later by a liquidation.



45
Mixed Cargo: Carriage and Packing

In the early morning I drove through Marseilles to the station,
and as I passed familiar places on my way, and then new, unfamiliar
ones or others that I remembered only vaguely, the
city became a book in my hands, into which I hurriedly glanced
a few last times before it passed from my sight for who knows
how long into a warehouse crate.



46
Closed For Alterations

In a dream I took my life with a gun. When it went off I did not
wake up but saw myself for a while lying. Only then did I wake.


47
"Augeas" Self-Service Restaurant

This is the weightiest objection to the mode of life of the confirmed
bachelor: he eats by himself. Taking food alone tends to
make one hard and coarse. Those accustomed to it must lead a
Spartan life if they are not to go downhill. Hermits have observed,
if for only this reason, a frugal diet. For it is only in company
that eating is done justice; food must be divided and distributed
if it is to be well received. No matter by whom: formerly a beggar
at the table enriched each banquet. The splitting up and giving
are all-important, not sociable conversation. What is surprising,
on the other hand, is that without food conviviality
grows precarious. Playing host levels differences, binds together.
The Count of Saint-Germain fasted before loaded tables,
and by this alone dominated conversation. When all abstain,
however, rivalries and conflict ensue.



48
Stamp Shop

To someone looking through piles of old letters a stamp that has
long been out of circulation on a torn envelope often says more
than a reading of dozens of pages. Sometimes you come across
them on postcards and are unsure whether you should detach
them or keep the card as it is, like a page by an old master that
has different but equally precious drawings on both sides. There
are also, in the glass-cases of cafes, letters with a charge on them,
pilloried before all eyes. Or have they been deported, and have
to wait in this case for years, languishing on a glass Salas y
Gomez? Letters that remain long unopened take on a brutal
look; they are disinherited, and malignantly plot revenge for
long days of suffering. Many of them later figure in the windows
of stamp dealers, as entires branded over and over with postmarks.

As is known, there are collectors who concern themselves only
with post-marked stamps, and it would not be difficult to
believe them the only ones who have penetrated the secret. They
confine themselves to the occult part of the stamp: the postmark.
For the postmark is the dark side of stamps. There are
ceremonious ones that place a halo about the head of Queen
Victoria, and prophetic ones that give Humbert a martyr's
crown. But no sadistic fantasy can equal the black practice that
covers faces with weals, and cleaves the land of entire continents
like an earthquake. And the perverse pleasure in contrasting
this violated stamp-body with its white lace-garnished tulle
dress: the serrated border. The pursuer of postmarks must
possess like a detective information on the most notorious post
offices, like an archaeologist the art of reconstructing the torsos
of the most foreign place-names, and like a cabbalist an inventory
of dates for an entire century. Stamps bristle with tiny
numbers, minute letters, diminutive leaves and eyes. They are
graphic cellular tissue. All this swarms about and, like lower
animals, lives on even when mutilated. This is why such
powerful pictures can be made of pieces of stamp stuck together.
But in them life bears always a hint of corruption to signify that
it is composed of dead matter. Their portraits and obscene
groups are littered with bones and riddled with worms.

Do the colour sequences of the long sets perhaps refract the light
of a strange sun? Did the postal ministries of the Vatican or
Ecuador capture rays unknown to us? And why are we not
shown the stamps of the superior planets? The thousand
gradations of fire-red that are in circulation on Venus, and the
four great grey shades of Mars and the unnumbered stamps of
Saturn?

Countries and oceans on stamps are only the provinces, kings
only the hirelings of numbers that steep them in their colours at
will. Stamp-albums are magic reference-books, the numbers of
monarchs and palaces, of animals and allegories and states are
recorded in them. Postal traffic depends on their harmony as
the motions of the planets depend on the harmony of the
celestial numbers.

Old Groschen-stamps showing only one or two large figures in
an oval. They look like those first photos from which, in blacklacquered
frames, relations we never knew look down on us:
figure-shaped great-aunts or forefathers. Thum and Taxis too
has the big figures on its stamps; there they are like the bewitched
numbers of taximeters. One would not be surprised, one evening,
to see the light of a candle shining through them from behind.
But then there are small stamps without perforations, without
indication of currency or country. In a tightly-woven spider's
web they bear only a number. These are perhaps fate's true
lottery tickets.

Script on Turkish piastre-stamps is like the slanted, altogether
too dandyish, too gleaming breast-pin in the tie of a sly, only
half-Europeanized merchant from Constantinople. They number
among the postal parvenus, the large, badly perforated,
garish formats of Nicaragua or Colombia, which deck themselves
out like banknotes.

Extra-postage stamps are the spirits among stamps. They are
unaltering. The changes of monarchs and forms of government
pass over them without trace, as over phantoms.
The child looks towards far-off Liberia through an inverted
opera-glass: there it lies behind its little strip of sea with its
palms, just as the stamps show it. With Vasco da Gama he sails
around a triangle as isoscelean as hope and whose colours
change with the weather. A travel brochure for the Cape of
Good Hope. When he sees the swan on Australian stamps, it is
always, even on the blue, green and brown issues, the black
swan that is found only in Australia and here glides on the waters
of a pool as on the most pacific ocean.

Stamps are the visiting-cards that the great states leave in a
child's room.

Like Gulliver the child travels among the lands and peoples
of his postage stamps. The geography and history of the Lilliputians,
the whole science of the little nation with all its figures
and names, is instilled in him in sleep. He takes part in their
transactions, attends their purple assemblies, watches the
launching of their little ships and celebrates with their crowned
heads, enthroned behind hedges, jubilees.

There is, it is known, a stamp-language that is to flower-language
what the morse alphabet is to the written one. But for
how long will the flowers continue to bloom between the
telegraph poles? Are not the great artistic stamps of the postwar
years, with their full colours, already the autumnal asters
and dahlias of this flora? Stephan, a German and not by chance
a contemporary of Jean Paul, planted this seed in the summery
middle of the nineteenth century. It will not survive the
twentieth.



49
Si Parla Italiano

I sat at night in violent pain on a bench. Opposite me on
another two girls sat down. They seemed to want to discuss
something in confidence and began to whisper. Nobody except
me was nearby and I should not have understood their Italian
however loud it had been. But now I could not resist the feeling,
in face of this unmotivated whispering in a language inaccessible
to me, that a cool dressing was being applied to the painful place.



50
Technical Aid

Nothing is poorer than a truth expressed as it was thought.
Committed to writing in such a case, it is not even a bad photograph.
And the truth refuses (like a child or a woman who does
not love us), facing the lens of writing while we crouch under the
black cloth, to keep still and look amiable. Truth wants to be
startled abruptly, at one stroke, from her self-immersion,
whether by uproar, music or cries for help. Who could count
the alarm signals with which the inner world of the true writer
is equipped? And to "write" is nothing other than to set them
jangling. Then the sweet odalisque rises with a start, snatches
whatever first comes to hand in the mêlée of her boudoir, our
cranium, wraps it around her and flees us, almost unrecognizable,
to other people. But how well-constituted she must be,
how healthily built, to step in such manner among them, contorted,
rattled, and yet victorious, captivating.



51
Hardware

Quotations in my work are like wayside robbers who leap out
armed and relieve the stroller of his conviction.

The killing of a criminal can be moral -- but never its legitimation.
The provider for all mankind is God, and the state His
deputy.

The expressions of people moving about a picture-gallery show
ill-concealed disappointment that only pictures hang there.



52
Tax Advice

Beyond doubt: a secret connection exists between the measure
of goods and the measure oflife, which is to say, between money
and time. The more trivial the content of a lifetime, the more
fragmented, multifarious, and disparate are its moments, while
the grand period characterizes a superior existence. Very aptly,
Lichtenberg suggests that time whiled away should be seen as
made smaller, rather than shorter, and he also observes: "a few
dozen million minutes make up a life of forty-five years, and
something more." When a currency is in use a few million units
of which are insignificant, life will have to be counted in seconds,
rather than years, if it is to appear a respectable sum. And it will
be frittered away like a bundle of bank notes: Austria cannot
break the habit of thinking in florins.

Money and rain belong together. The weather itself is an
index of the state of this world. Bliss is cloudless, knows no
weather. There also comes a cloudless realm of perfect goods,
on which no money falls.

A descriptive analysis of bank notes is needed. The unlimited
satirical force of such a book would be equalled only by its
objectivity. For nowhere more naïvely than in these documents
does capitalism display itself in solemn earnest. The innocent
cupids frolicking about numbers, the goddesses holding tablets
of the law, the stalwart heroes sheathing their swords before
monetary units, are a world of their own: ornamenting the
façade of hell. If Lichtenberg had found paper money in circulation,
the plan of this work would not have escaped him.



53
Legal Protection for the Needy

Publisher: My expectations have been most rudely disappointed.
Your work makes no impression on the public; you do not
have the slightest pulling power. And I have not spared expenses.
I have incurred advertising costs. You know how highly I
think of you, despite all this. But you cannot hold it against me
if even I now have to listen to my commercial conscience. If
there is anyone who does what he can for authors, I am he. But,
after all, I also have a wife and children to look after. I do not
mean, of course, that I hold you accountable for the losses of the
past years. But a bitter feeling of disappointment will remain. I
regret that I am at present absolutely unable to support you
further.

Author: Sir, why did you become a publisher? We shall have
the answer by return mail. But permit me to say one thing in
advance. I figure in your archive as number 27. You have
published five of my books; in other words, you have put your
money five times on number 27. I am sorry that number 27 did
not prove a winner. Incidentally, you only took coupled bets.
Only because I come next to your lucky number 28. Now you
know why you became a publisher. You might just as well have
entered an honest profession, like your esteemed father. But
never a thought for the morrow -- such is youth. Continue to
indulge your habits. But avoid posing as an honest businessman.
Do not feign innocence when you have gambled everything
away; do not talk about your eight-hour working day, or the
night when you hardly get any rest, either. "Truth and fidelity
before all else, my child." And don't start making scenes with
your numbers! Otherwise you will be bounced.



54
Doctor's Night-Bell

Sexual fulfilment delivers the man from his secret, which does
not consist in sexuality but which in its fulfilment, and perhaps
in it alone, is severed -- not solved. This secret is comparable to
the fetter that binds him to life. The woman cuts it, the man is
free to die, because his life has lost its secret. Thereby he attains
rebirth, and as his beloved frees him from the mother's spell, the
woman literally detaches him from Mother Earth-a midwife
who cuts that umbilical cord which is woven of nature's mystery.



55
Madame Ariane --
Second Courtyard on the Left

He who asks fortune-tellers the future unwittingly forfeits an
inner intimation of coming events that is a thousand times more
exact than anything they may say. He is impelled by inertia,
rather than curiosity, and nothing is more unlike the submissive
apathy with which he hears his fate revealed than the alert
dexterity with which the man of courage lays hands on the
future. For presence of mind is an extract of the future, and
precise awareness of the present moment more decisive than
foreknowledge of the most distant events. Omens, presentiments,
signals pass day and night through our organism like
wave impulses. To interpret them or to use them, that is the
question. The two are irreconcilable. Cowardice and apathy
counsel the former, lucidity and freedom the latter. For before
such prophecy or warning has been mediated by word or image
it has lost its vitality, the power to strike at our centre and force
us, we scarcely know how, to act accordingly. If we neglect to
do so, and only then, the message is deciphered. We read it. But
it is now too late. Hence, when you are taken unawares by an
outbreak of fire or the news of a death, there is in the first mute
shock a feeling of guilt, the indistinct reproach: did you really
not know of this? Did not the dead person's name, the last time
you uttered it, sound differently in your mouth? Do you not see
in the flames a sign from yesterday evening, in a language you
only now understand? And if an object dear to you has been
lost, was there not, hours, days before, an aura of mockery or
mourning about it that gave the secret away? Like ultraviolet
rays memory shows to each man in the book of life a script that
invisibly and prophetically glosses the text. But it is not with
impunity that these intentions are exchanged, that unlived life
is handed over to cards, spirits, stars, to be in an instant squandered,
misused, and returned to us disfigured; we do not go
unpunished for cheating the body of its power to meet the fates
on its own ground and triumph. The moment is the Caudine
Yoke beneath which fate must bow to the body. To turn the
threatening future into a fulfilled now, the only desirable telepathic
miracle, is a work of bodily presence of mind. Primitive
epochs, when such demeanour was part of man's daily husbandry,
provided him, in the naked body, with the most reliable
instrument of divination. Even the ancients knew of this true
practice, and Scipio, stumbling as he set foot on Carthaginian
soil, cried out, spreading his arms wide as he fell, the watchword
of victory, "Teneo te, terra Africana!" What would have become a
portent of disaster he binds bodily to the moment, making himself
the factotum of his body. In just such mastery the ancient
ascetic exercises of fasting, chastity, and vigil have for all time
celebrated their greatest victories. Each morning the day lies
like a fresh shirt on our bed; this incomparably fine, incomparably
tightly woven tissue of pure prediction fits us perfectly.
The happiness of the next twenty-four hours depends on our
ability, on waking, to pick it up.



56
Costume Wardrobe

A bearer of news of death appears to himself as very important.
His feeling -- even against all reason -- makes him a messenger
from the realm of the dead. For the community of all the dead is
so immense that even he who only reports death is aware of it.
Ad plures ire was the Latins' expression for dying.

At Bellinzona I noticed three priests in the station waiting
room. They were sitting on a bench diagonally opposite mine.
In rapt attention I observed the gestures of the one seated in the
middle, who was distinguished from his brothers by a red skullcap.
While he speaks to them, his hands are folded in his lap,
and only now and then is one or the other very slightly raised
and moved. I think to myself: his right hand must always know
what the left is doing.

Is there anyone who has not once been stunned, emerging
from the Metro into the open air, to step into brilliant sunlight?
And yet the sun shone a few minutes earlier, when he went
down, just as brightly. So quickly has he forgotten the weather
of the upper world. And as quickly the world in its turn will
forget him. For who can say more of his own existence than that
it has passed through the lives of two or three others as gently
and closely as the weather?

Again and again, in Shakespeare, in Calderon, battles fill the
last act, and kings, princes, attendants and followers "enter,
fleeing". The moment in which they become visible to spectators
brings them to a standstill. The flight of the dramatis personae is
arrested by the stage. Their entry into the visual field of nonparticipating
and truly impartial persons allows the harassed to
draw breath, bathes them in new air. The appearance on stage
of those who enter "fleeing" takes from this its hidden meaning.
Our reading of this formula is imbued with expectation of a
place, a light, a footlight glare, in which our flight through life
may be likewise sheltered in the presence of onlooking strangers.



57
Betting Office

Bourgeois existence is the regime of private affairs. The more
important the nature and implications of a mode of behaviour,
the further removed it is from observation here. Political conviction,
financial situation, religion -- all these seek hideouts,
and the family is the rotten, dismal edifice in whose closets and
crannies the most ignominious instincts are deposited. Mundane
life proclaims the total subjugation of eroticism to privacy. So
wooing becomes a silent, dead-serious transaction between two
persons alone, and this thoroughly private wooing, severed
from all responsibility, is what is really new in "flirting". In
contrast, the proletarian and the feudal type of men resemble
each other in that in wooing it is much less the woman than their
competitors that they overcome. In this they respect the woman
far more deeply than in her freedom, being at her command
without cross-examining her. The shift of erotic emphasis to the
public sphere is both feudal and proletarian. To be seen with a
woman on such-and-such an occasion can mean more than to
sleep with her. Thus in marriage, too, value does not lie in the
sterile "harmony" of the partners: it is as the eccentric offshoot
of their struggles and rivalries enacted elsewhere that, like the
child, the spiritual force of marriage is manifest.



58
Stand-up Beer Hall

Sailors seldom come ashore; service on the high seas is a holiday
by comparison with the labour in harbours, where loading and
unloading must often be done day and night. When a gang is
then given a few hours' shore-leave it is already dark. At best
the cathedral looms like a dark promontory on the way to the
tavern. The ale-house is the key to every town; to know where
German beer can be drunk is geography and ethnology enough.
The German seamen's bar unrolls the nocturnal plan of the
city: to find the way from there to the brothel, to the other bars
is not difficult. Their names have criss-crossed the mealtime
conversations for days. For when a harbour has been left behind,
one sailor after another hoists like little pennants the nicknames
of bars and dance-halls, beautiful women and national dishes
from the next. But who knows whether he will go ashore this
time? For this reason, no sooner is the ship declared and moored
than tradesmen come aboard with souvenirs: chains and picture
postcards, oil-paintings, knives and little marble figures. The
city sights are not seen but bought. In the sailors' chests the
leather belt from Hong Kong is juxtaposed to a panorama of
Palermo and a girl's photo from Stettin. And their real habitat
is exactly the same. They know nothing of the hazy distances in
which, for the bourgeois, foreign lands are enshrouded. What
first asserts itself in every city is, first, service on board, and then
German beer, English shaving-soap and Dutch tobacco. Imbued
to the marrow with the international norm of industry, they are
not the dupes of palms and icebergs. The seaman is sated with
close-ups, and only the most exact nuances speak to him. He can
distinguish countries better by the preparation of their fish than
by their building-styles or landscapes. He is so much at home in
detail that the ocean routes where he cuts close to other ships
(greeting those of his own firm with howls from the siren) become
noisy thoroughfares where you have to give way to traffic.
He lives on the open sea in a city where, on the Marseilles
Cannebière, a Port Said bar stands diagonally opposite a Hamburg
brothel, and the Neapolitan Castel del Ovo is to be found
on Barcelona's Plaza Cataluña. For officers their native town
still holds pride of place. But for the ordinary sailor, or the
stoker, the people whose transported labour-power maintains
contact with the commodities in the hull of the ship, the interlaced
harbours are no longer even a homeland, but a cradle.
And listening to them one realizes what mendacity resides in
tourism.



59
No Vagrants!

All religions have honoured the beggar. For he proves that in a
matter at the same time as prosaic and holy, banal and regenerating
as the giving of alms, intellect and morality, consistency and
principles are miserably inadequate.

We deplore the beggars in the South, forgetting that their
persistence in front of our noses is as justified as a scholar's before
a difficult text. No shadow of hesitation, no slightest wish or
deliberation in our faces escapes their notice. The telepathy of
the coachman who, by accosting us, makes known to us our
previously unsuspected inclination to board his vehicle, and of
the shopkeeper who extracts from his junk the single chain or
cameo that could delight us, is of the same order.



60
To The Planetarium

If one had to expound the doctrine of antiquity with utmost
brevity while standing on one leg, as did Hillel that of the Jews,
it could only be in this sentence: "They alone shall possess the
earth who live from the powers of the cosmos." Nothing distinguishes
the ancient from the modern man so much as the
former's absorption in a cosmic experience scarcely known to
later periods. Its waning is marked by the flowering of astronomy
at the beginning of the modem age. Kepler, Copernicus,
and Tycho Brahe were certainly not driven by scientific impulses
alone. All the same, the exclusive emphasis on an optical
connection to the universe, to which astronomy very quickly
led, contained a portent of what was to come. The ancients'
intercourse with the cosmos had been different: the ecstatic
trance. For it is in this experience alone that we gain certain
knowledge of what is nearest to us and what is remotest to us,
and never of one without the other. This means, however, that
man can be in ecstatic contact with the cosmos only communally.
It is the dangerous error of modern men to regard this
experience as unimportant and avoidable, and to consign it to
the individual as the poetic rapture of starry nights. It is not; its
hour strikes again and again, and then neither nations nor
generations can escape it, as was made terribly clear by the last
war, which was an attempt at new and unprecedented commingling
with the cosmic powers. Human multitudes, gases,
electrical forces were hurled into the open country, highfrequency
currents coursed through the landscape, new constellations 
rose in the sky, aerial space and ocean depths
thundered with propellers, and everywhere sacrificial shafts
were dug in Mother Earth. This immense wooing of the cosmos
was enacted for the first time on a planetary scale, that is, in the
spirit of technology. But because the lust for profit of the ruling
class sought satisfaction through it, technology betrayed man
and turned the bridal bed into a bloodbath. The mastery of
nature, so the imperialists teach, is the purpose of all technology.
But who would trust a cane wielder who proclaimed the mastery
of children by adults to be the purpose of education? Is not
education above all the indispensable ordering of the relationship
between generations and therefore mastery, if we are to use
this term, of that relationship and not of children? And likewise
technology is not the mastery of nature but of the relation
between nature and man. Men as a species completed their
development thousands of years ago; but mankind as a species
is just beginning his. In technology a physis is being organized
through which mankind's contact with the cosmos takes a new
and different form from that which it had in nations and
families. One need recall only the experience of velocities by
virtue of which mankind is now preparing to embark on incalculable
journeys into the interior of time, to encounter there
rhythms from which the sick shall draw strength as they did
earlier on high mountains or at Southern seas. The "Lunaparks"
are a prefiguration of sanatoria. The paroxysm of genuine cosmic
experience is not tied to that tiny fragment of nature that we are
accustomed to call "Nature". In the nights of annihilation of the
last war the frame of mankind was shaken by a feeling that
resembled the bliss of the epileptic. And the revolts that followed
it were the first attempt of mankind to bring the new body
under its control. The power of the proletariat is the measure of
its convalescence. If it is not gripped to the very marrow by the
discipline of this power, no pacifist polemics will save it. Living
substance conquers the frenzy of destruction only in the ecstasy
of procreation.

