Cut-out models. -- Booths have put in like rocking craft to both
sides of the stone jetty on which the people jostle. There are
sailing vessels with high masts from which hang pennants,
steamers with smoke rising from their funnels, barges that keep
their cargoes long stowed. Among them are ships into which
one vanishes; only men are admitted, but through hatchways
you can see women's arms, veils, peacock-feathers. Elsewhere
exotic people stand on the deck apparently trying to frighten
the public away with eccentric music. But with what indifference
is it not received. You climb up hesitantly, with a
broad rolling gait as on ships' stairways, and as long as you are
aloft you realize that the whole is cut off from the shore. Those
who re-emerge from below, taciturn and benumbed, have seen,
on red scales where dyed alcohol rises and falls, their own
marriage come into being and cease to be; the yellow man who
began wooing at the foot of this scale, at the top of it deserted his
blue wife. In mirrors they have seen the floor melt away beneath
their feet like water, and stumbled into the open on rolling
stairways. Into the quarter the fleet has brought unrest: the
women and girls on board have brazen airs, and everything
edible has been taken aboard in the land of idle luxury. One is
so totally cut off by the ocean that everything is encountered
here as if at once for the first and the last time. Sea-lions, dwarfs
and dogs are preserved as in an ark. Even the railway has been
brought in once and for all, and circulates endlessly through a
tunnel. For a few days the quarter has become the port of a
south-sea island, its inhabitants savages swooning in covetous
wonderment before the things that Europe tosses at their feet.

Targets. -- The landscapes of shooting-ranges in fairground
booths ought to be described collectively as a corpus. There is,
for example, a polar waste against which are set bundles of
white clay-pipes, the targets, radiating like spokes. Behind this,
and before an unarticulated strip of woodland, two foresters are
painted, while right at the front, in the manner of movable
scenery, are two sirens with provocative breasts in oil colours.
Elsewhere pipes bristle from the hair of women who are seldom
painted with skirts, usually in tights. Or they protrude from a
fan they spread in their hands. Moving pipes revolve slowly in
the further regions of the clay-pigeon booths. Other stands
present theatricals directed by the spectator with his rifle. If he
hits the bull's-eye the performance starts. On one occasion there
were thirty-six such boxes and above the stage of each was
written what they held in store: "Jeanne d' Arc en prison",
"L'hospitalité", "Les rues de Paris". On another booth: "Exécution
capitale". In front of the closed gate a guillotine, a judge in a
black robe and a priest holding a crucifix. If the shot hits the
mark the gate opens and a board is extended on which the
miscreant stands between two policemen. He places his neck
automatically under the blade and is decapitated. In the same
way: "Les délices du mariage". A penurious interior opens. The
father is seen in the middle of the room holding a child on his
knee and with his free hand rocking a cradle containing another.
"L' Enfer" -- when its gates part a devil is seen tormenting a
wretched soul. Next to him another is dragging a priest towards
a cauldron in which the damned must stew. "Le bagne" ["clink"]
-- a door with a gaoler in front of it. When the target is hit he
pulls a bell-cord. The bell rings, the door opens. Two convicts
are seen manhandling a big wheel. They seem to have to turn it.
Yet another constellation: a fiddler with his dancing bear.
When you shoot successfully the bow moves. The bear beats a
drum with his paw and lifts one leg. One thinks of the fairy-tale
of the brave little tailor, and could also imagine Sleeping Beauty
awakened with a shot, Snow White freed of the apple by a shot
or Little Red Riding-Hood released by a shot. The shot breaks
in magically upon the existences of the puppets with that
curative power that hews the heads from monsters and reveals
them to be princesses. As is the case with the great door without
an inscription: if you have hit the mark it opens and before red
plush curtains stands a Moor who seems to bow slightly. He
holds in front of him a golden bowl. On it lie three fruit. The
first opens and a tiny person stands inside it and bows. In the
second two equally diminutive puppets revolve in a dance. (The
third did not open.) Below, in front of the table on which the
remaining scenery stands, a small horseman with the inscription:
"Route minée". If you hit the bull's-eye there is a bang and
the rider somersaults with his horse, but stays -- needless to say -- in
the saddle.

Stereoscope. -- Riga. The daily market, a huddling city of low
wooden booths, stretches along the jetty, a broad, dirty stone
embankment without warehouse buildings, by the waters of the
Dvina. Small steamers, often showing no more than their
funnels above the quay wall, have put in at the blackish dwarftown.
(The larger ships are moored downstream.) Grimy boards
are the clay-grey foundation on which, glowing in the cold air,
sparse colours melt. At some corners there stand all the year
round, alongside huts for fish, meat, boots and clothes, petty bourgeois
women with the coloured paper rods that penetrate
as far as the West only at Christmas-time. Like being scolded
by the most-loved voice -- such are these rods. For a few coppers
multi-coloured chastising switches. At the end of the jetty,
fenced off and only thirty paces from the water, are the red-and-white
mounds of the apple-market. The apples on sale are
packed in straw, those sold lie without straw in the housewives'
baskets. A dark-red church rises beyond, outshone in the fresh
November air by the cheeks of the apples. -- Several shops for
boating-tackle in small houses near the jetty. Ropes are painted
on them. Everywhere you see wares depicted on signboards or
on house-walls. One shop in the town has cases and belts larger
than life on its bare brick walls. A low corner-house with a shop
for corsets and millinery is decorated with ladies' faces complete
with finery, and severe bodices painted on a yellow-ochre
ground. Protruding from it at an angle is a lantern with similar
pictures on its glass panes. The whole is like the façade of a
fantasy-brothel. Another house, likewise not far from the harbour,
has sugar-sacks and coal in grey and black relief on a grey
wall. Somewhere else shoes rain from horns of plenty. Ironmongery
is painted in detail, hammers, cogs, pliers and the
tiniest screws on one board that looks like a page from an outmoded 
child's painting-book. With such pictures the town is
permeated. Between them, however, rise tall, fortress-like
desolate buildings evoking all the terrors of Tsarism.

Not for sale. -- A mechanical cabinet at the fair at Lucca. The
exhibition is accommodated in a long symmetrically-divided
tent. A few steps lead up to it. The signboard shows a table with
a few motionless puppets. You enter the tent by the right-hand
opening and leave it by the left. In the bright interior two tables
extend towards the back. They touch with their inner edges so
that only a narrow space is left to walk round them. Both tables
are low and glass-covered. On them stand the puppets (twenty
to twenty-five centimetres high on average), while in their lower
concealed part the clockwork that drives them ticks audibly.
A narrow raised board for children runs along the sides of the
tables. There are distorting mirrors on the walls. -- Next to the
entrance princely personages are to be seen. Each of them
makes a particular gesture: one a spacious, inviting movement
with the right or left arm, another a swivelling of his glassy eyes;
some roll their eyes and move their arms at the same time.
Franz Joseph stands there, Pius IX, enthroned and flanked by
two cardinals, Queen Elena of Italy, the Sultaness, Wilhelm I
on horseback, a small Napoleon III and an even smaller Victor
Emmanuel as Crown Prince. Biblical figurines follow, then the
Passion. Herod orders the slaughter of the infants with manifold
movements of the head. He opens his mouth wide while nodding,
extends and lets fall his arm. Two executioners stand before him,
one free-wheeling with a cutting sword, a decapitated child
under his arm, the other, on the point of stabbing, stands
motionless but for his rolling eyes. And two mothers are there:
one endlessly and gently shaking her head like a depressive, the
other raising her arms slowly, beseechingly. -- The nailing to the
cross. It lies on the ground. The hirelings hammer in the nails.
Christ nods. -- Christ crucified, slaked by the sponge of vinegar,
which a soldier offers him in slow jerks and then instantly withdraws.
Each time the Saviour slightly raises his chin. From
behind an angel bends over the cross with a chalice for blood,
holds it in front of the body and then, as if it were filled, removes
it. -- The other table shows genre pictures. Gargantua with
dumplings. In front of a plate he shovels them into his mouth
with both hands, alternately lifting his left arm and his right.
Each hand holds a fork on which a dumpling is impaled. -- An
Alpine maiden spinning. -- Two monkeys playing violins.-A
magician has two barrel-like containers in front of him. The one
on the right opens, and the top half of a lady's body emerges.
The one on the left opens: from it rises half-length a man's body.
Again the right-hand container opens and now a ram's skull
appears with the lady's face between its horns. Then on the left
a monkey presents itself instead of the man. Then it all starts
again from the beginning. -- Another magician: he has a table
in front of him on which he holds beakers upside-down in each
hand. Under them, as he alternately lifts one then the other,
appears now a loaf or an apple, now a flower or a die. -- The
magic well: a farm-boy stands head-shaking at a well. A girl
draws water and the unfaltering thick stream of glass runs from
the well-mouth. -- The enchanted lovers: a golden bush or a
golden flame parts in two wings. Within are seen two puppets.
They turn their faces towards each other and then away, as if
looking at each other in confused astonishment. -- Below each
figure a small label. The whole dating back to 1862.