Atrani. -- The gently rising, curved baroque staircase leading to
the church. The railing behind the church. The litanies of the
old women at the "Ave Maria": preparing to die first-class. If
you turn around, the church verges like God Himself on the sea.
Each morning the Christian Era crumbles the rock, but between
the walls below, the night falls always into the four old Roman
quarters. Alleyways like air shafts. A well in the market-place. In
the late afternoon women about it. Then, in solitude: archaic
plashing.

Navy. -- The beauty of the tall sailing ships is unique. Not only
has their outline remained unchanged for centuries, but also
they appear in the most immutable landscape: at sea, silhouetted
against the horizon.

Versailles Façade. -- It is as if this château had been forgotten where
hundreds of years ago it was placed Par Ordre du Roi for only two
hours as the movable scenery for a féerie. Of its splendour it keeps
none for itself, giving it undivided to that royal condition which
it concludes. Before this backdrop it becomes a stage on which
the tragedy of absolute monarchy was performed as an allegorical
ballet. Yet today it is only the wall in the shade of which
one seeks to enjoy the prospect into blue distance created by
Le Notre.

Heidelberg Castle. -- Ruins jutting into the sky can appear doubly
beautiful on clear days when, in their windows or above their
contours, the gaze meets passing clouds. Through the transient
spectacle it opens in the sky, destruction reaffirms the eternity
of these fallen stones.

Seville, Alcazar. -- An architecture that follows fantasy's first
impulse. It is undeflected by practical considerations. These
rooms provide only for dreams and festivities, their consummation.
Here dance and silence become the leitmotifs, since all
human movement is absorbed by the soundless tumult of the
ornament.

Marseilles, Cathedral. -- On the least frequented, sunniest square
stands the cathedral. This place is deserted, despite the proximity
at its feet of La Joliette, the harbour, to the south, and a
proletarian district to the north. As a reloading point for
intangible, unfathomable goods, the bleak building stands
between quay and warehouse. Nearly forty years were spent on
it. But when all was complete, in 1893, place and time had conspired
victoriously in this monument against its architects and
sponsors, and the wealth of the clergy had given rise to a gigantic
railway station that could never be opened to traffic. The
façade gives an indication of the waiting rooms within, where
passengers of the first to fourth classes (though before God they
are all equal), wedged among their spiritual possessions as
between cases, sit reading hymnbooks that, with their concordances
and cross references, look very much like international
timetables. Extracts from the railway traffic regulations in the
form of pastoral letters hang on the walls, tariffs for the discount
on special trips in Satan's luxury train are consulted, and
cabinets where the long-distance traveller can discreetly wash
are kept in readiness as confessionals. This is the Marseilles
religion station. Sleeping cars to eternity depart from here at
Mass times.


Freiburg Minster. -- The special sense of a town is formed in part
for its inhabitants -- and perhaps even in the memory of the
traveller who has stayed there-by the timbre and intervals
with which its tower-clocks begin to chime.

Moscow, St Basil's. -- What the Byzantine madonna carries on
her arm is only a life-size wooden doll. Her expression of pain
before a Christ whose childhood remains only suggested, represented,
is more intense than any she could display with a
realistic image of a boy.

Boscotrecase. -- The distinction of the stone-pine forest: its roof is
formed without interlacements.

Naples, Museo Nazionale. -- Archaic statues offer in their smiles
the consciousness of their bodies to the onlooker, as a child holds
out to us freshly picked flowers untied and unarranged; later
art laces its expressions more tightly, like the adult who binds
the lasting bouquet with cutting grasses.

Florence, Baptistry. -- On the portal the "Spes" by Andrea de
Pisano. Sitting, she helplessly stretches her arms for a fruit that
remains beyond her reach. And yet she is winged. Nothing is
more true.

Sky. -- As I stepped from a house in a dream the night sky met
my eyes. It shed intense radiance. For in this plenitude of stars
the images of the constellations stood sensuously present. A
Lion, a Maiden, a Scale and many others shone lividly down,
dense clusters of stars, upon the earth. No moon was to be seen.