To someone looking through piles of old letters a stamp that has
long been out of circulation on a torn envelope often says more
than a reading of dozens of pages. Sometimes you come across
them on postcards and are unsure whether you should detach
them or keep the card as it is, like a page by an old master that
has different but equally precious drawings on both sides. There
are also, in the glass-cases of cafes, letters with a charge on them,
pilloried before all eyes. Or have they been deported, and have
to wait in this case for years, languishing on a glass Salas y
Gomez? Letters that remain long unopened take on a brutal
look; they are disinherited, and malignantly plot revenge for
long days of suffering. Many of them later figure in the windows
of stamp dealers, as entires branded over and over with postmarks.

As is known, there are collectors who concern themselves only
with post-marked stamps, and it would not be difficult to
believe them the only ones who have penetrated the secret. They
confine themselves to the occult part of the stamp: the postmark.
For the postmark is the dark side of stamps. There are
ceremonious ones that place a halo about the head of Queen
Victoria, and prophetic ones that give Humbert a martyr's
crown. But no sadistic fantasy can equal the black practice that
covers faces with weals, and cleaves the land of entire continents
like an earthquake. And the perverse pleasure in contrasting
this violated stamp-body with its white lace-garnished tulle
dress: the serrated border. The pursuer of postmarks must
possess like a detective information on the most notorious post
offices, like an archaeologist the art of reconstructing the torsos
of the most foreign place-names, and like a cabbalist an inventory
of dates for an entire century. Stamps bristle with tiny
numbers, minute letters, diminutive leaves and eyes. They are
graphic cellular tissue. All this swarms about and, like lower
animals, lives on even when mutilated. This is why such
powerful pictures can be made of pieces of stamp stuck together.
But in them life bears always a hint of corruption to signify that
it is composed of dead matter. Their portraits and obscene
groups are littered with bones and riddled with worms.

Do the colour sequences of the long sets perhaps refract the light
of a strange sun? Did the postal ministries of the Vatican or
Ecuador capture rays unknown to us? And why are we not
shown the stamps of the superior planets? The thousand
gradations of fire-red that are in circulation on Venus, and the
four great grey shades of Mars and the unnumbered stamps of
Saturn?

Countries and oceans on stamps are only the provinces, kings
only the hirelings of numbers that steep them in their colours at
will. Stamp-albums are magic reference-books, the numbers of
monarchs and palaces, of animals and allegories and states are
recorded in them. Postal traffic depends on their harmony as
the motions of the planets depend on the harmony of the
celestial numbers.

Old Groschen-stamps showing only one or two large figures in
an oval. They look like those first photos from which, in blacklacquered
frames, relations we never knew look down on us:
figure-shaped great-aunts or forefathers. Thum and Taxis too
has the big figures on its stamps; there they are like the bewitched
numbers of taximeters. One would not be surprised, one evening,
to see the light of a candle shining through them from behind.
But then there are small stamps without perforations, without
indication of currency or country. In a tightly-woven spider's
web they bear only a number. These are perhaps fate's true
lottery tickets.

Script on Turkish piastre-stamps is like the slanted, altogether
too dandyish, too gleaming breast-pin in the tie of a sly, only
half-Europeanized merchant from Constantinople. They number
among the postal parvenus, the large, badly perforated,
garish formats of Nicaragua or Colombia, which deck themselves
out like banknotes.

Extra-postage stamps are the spirits among stamps. They are
unaltering. The changes of monarchs and forms of government
pass over them without trace, as over phantoms.
The child looks towards far-off Liberia through an inverted
opera-glass: there it lies behind its little strip of sea with its
palms, just as the stamps show it. With Vasco da Gama he sails
around a triangle as isoscelean as hope and whose colours
change with the weather. A travel brochure for the Cape of
Good Hope. When he sees the swan on Australian stamps, it is
always, even on the blue, green and brown issues, the black
swan that is found only in Australia and here glides on the waters
of a pool as on the most pacific ocean.

Stamps are the visiting-cards that the great states leave in a
child's room.

Like Gulliver the child travels among the lands and peoples
of his postage stamps. The geography and history of the Lilliputians,
the whole science of the little nation with all its figures
and names, is instilled in him in sleep. He takes part in their
transactions, attends their purple assemblies, watches the
launching of their little ships and celebrates with their crowned
heads, enthroned behind hedges, jubilees.

There is, it is known, a stamp-language that is to flower-language
what the morse alphabet is to the written one. But for
how long will the flowers continue to bloom between the
telegraph poles? Are not the great artistic stamps of the postwar
years, with their full colours, already the autumnal asters
and dahlias of this flora? Stephan, a German and not by chance
a contemporary of Jean Paul, planted this seed in the summery
middle of the nineteenth century. It will not survive the
twentieth.