He who asks fortune-tellers the future unwittingly forfeits an
inner intimation of coming events that is a thousand times more
exact than anything they may say. He is impelled by inertia,
rather than curiosity, and nothing is more unlike the submissive
apathy with which he hears his fate revealed than the alert
dexterity with which the man of courage lays hands on the
future. For presence of mind is an extract of the future, and
precise awareness of the present moment more decisive than
foreknowledge of the most distant events. Omens, presentiments,
signals pass day and night through our organism like
wave impulses. To interpret them or to use them, that is the
question. The two are irreconcilable. Cowardice and apathy
counsel the former, lucidity and freedom the latter. For before
such prophecy or warning has been mediated by word or image
it has lost its vitality, the power to strike at our centre and force
us, we scarcely know how, to act accordingly. If we neglect to
do so, and only then, the message is deciphered. We read it. But
it is now too late. Hence, when you are taken unawares by an
outbreak of fire or the news of a death, there is in the first mute
shock a feeling of guilt, the indistinct reproach: did you really
not know of this? Did not the dead person's name, the last time
you uttered it, sound differently in your mouth? Do you not see
in the flames a sign from yesterday evening, in a language you
only now understand? And if an object dear to you has been
lost, was there not, hours, days before, an aura of mockery or
mourning about it that gave the secret away? Like ultraviolet
rays memory shows to each man in the book of life a script that
invisibly and prophetically glosses the text. But it is not with
impunity that these intentions are exchanged, that unlived life
is handed over to cards, spirits, stars, to be in an instant squandered,
misused, and returned to us disfigured; we do not go
unpunished for cheating the body of its power to meet the fates
on its own ground and triumph. The moment is the Caudine
Yoke beneath which fate must bow to the body. To turn the
threatening future into a fulfilled now, the only desirable telepathic
miracle, is a work of bodily presence of mind. Primitive
epochs, when such demeanour was part of man's daily husbandry,
provided him, in the naked body, with the most reliable
instrument of divination. Even the ancients knew of this true
practice, and Scipio, stumbling as he set foot on Carthaginian
soil, cried out, spreading his arms wide as he fell, the watchword
of victory, "Teneo te, terra Africana!" What would have become a
portent of disaster he binds bodily to the moment, making himself
the factotum of his body. In just such mastery the ancient
ascetic exercises of fasting, chastity, and vigil have for all time
celebrated their greatest victories. Each morning the day lies
like a fresh shirt on our bed; this incomparably fine, incomparably
tightly woven tissue of pure prediction fits us perfectly.
The happiness of the next twenty-four hours depends on our
ability, on waking, to pick it up.