A Tour of German Inflation

1. In the stock of phraseology that lays bare the amalgam of
stupidity and cowardice constituting the mode of life of the
German bourgeois, the locution referring to impending catastrophe --
that "things can't go on like this" -- is particularly
noteworthy. The helpless fixation on notions of security and
property deriving from past decades keeps the average citizen
from perceiving the quite remarkable stabilities of an entirely
new kind that underlie the present situation. Because the relative
stabilization of the prewar years benefited him, he feels
compelled to regard any state that dispossesses him as unstable.
But stable conditions need by no means be pleasant conditions,
and even before the war there were strata for whom stabilized
conditions amounted to stabilized wretchedness. To decline is
no less stable, no more surprising, than to rise. Only a view that
acknowledges downfall as the sole reason for the present situation
can advance beyond enervating amazement at what is daily
repeated, and perceive the phenomena of decline as stability
itself and rescue alone as extraordinary, verging on the marvellous
and incomprehensible. People in the national communities
of Central Europe live like the inhabitants of an encircled
town whose provisions and gunpowder are running out and for
whom deliverance is, by human reasoning, scarcely to be expected --
a case in which surrender, perhaps unconditional,
should be most seriously considered. But the silent, invisible
power that Central Europe feels opposing it does not negotiate.
Nothing, therefore, remains but to direct the gaze, in the perpetual
expectation of the final onslaught, on nothing except the
extraordinary event in which alone salvation now lies. But this
necessary state of intense and uncomplaining attention could,
because we are in mysterious contact with the powers besieging
us, really call forth a miracle. Conversely, the assumption that
things cannot go on like this will one day find itself apprised of
the fact that for the suffering of individuals as of communities
there is only one limit beyond which things cannot go: annihilation.

2. A curious paradox: people have only the narrowest private
interest in mind when they act, yet they are at the same time
more than ever determined in their behaviour by the instincts of
the mass. And more than ever mass instincts have become confused
and estranged from life. Whereas the obscure impulse of
the animal -- as innumerable anecdotes relate -- detects, as danger
approaches, a way of escape that still seems invisible, this
society, each of whose members cares only for his own abject
well-being, falls victim, with animal insensibility but without
the insensate intuition of animals, as a blind mass, to even the
most obvious danger, and the diversity of individual goals is
immaterial in face of the identity of the determining forces.
Again and again it has been shown that society's attachment to
its familiar and long-since-forfeited life is so rigid as to nullify
the genuinely human application of intellect, forethought, even
in dire peril. So that in this society the picture of imbecility is
complete: uncertainty, indeed perversion of vital instincts, and
impotence, indeed decay of the intellect. This is the condition
of the entire German bourgeoisie.

3. All close relationships are lit up by an almost intolerable,
piercing clarity in which they are scarcely able to survive. For
on the one hand, money stands ruinously at the centre of every
vital interest, but on the other, this is the very barrier before
which almost all relationships halt; so, more and more, in the
natural as in the moral sphere, unreflecting trust, calm, and
health are disappearing.

4. Not without reason is it customary to speak of "naked"
want. What is most damaging in the display of it, a practice
started under the dictates of necessity and making visible only a
thousandth part of the hidden distress, is not the pity or the
equally terrible awareness of his own impunity awakened in the
onlooker, but his shame. It is impossible to remain in a large
German city, where hunger forces the most wretched to live on
the bank notes with which passers-by seek to cover an exposure
that wounds them.

5. "Poverty disgraces no man." Well and good. But they disgrace
the poor man. They do it, and then console him with the
little adage. It is one of those that may once have held good but
have long since degenerated. The case is no different with the
brutal, "If a man does not work, neither shall he eat." When
there was work that fed a man, there was also poverty that did
not disgrace him, if it arose from deformity or other misfortune.
But this deprivation, into which millions are born and hundreds
of thousands are dragged by impoverishment, does indeed disgrace.
Filth and misery grow up around them like walls, the
work of invisible hands. And just as a man can endure much in
isolation, but feels justifiable shame when his wife sees him bear
it or suffers it herself, so he may tolerate much as long as he is
alone, and everything as long as he conceals it. But no one may
ever make peace with poverty when it falls like a gigantic
shadow upon his countrymen and his house. Then he must be
alert to every humiliation done to him and so discipline himself
that his suffering becomes no longer the downhill road of grief,
but the rising path of revolt. But of this there is no hope so long
as each blackest, most terrible stroke of fate, daily and even
hourly discussed by the press, set forth in all its illusory causes
and effects, helps no one uncover the dark powers that hold his
life in thrall.

6. To the foreigner cursorily acquainted with the pattern of
German life who has even briefly travelled about the country,
its inhabitants seem no less bizarre than an exotic race. A witty
Frenchman has said: "A German seldom understands himself.
If he has once understood himself, he will not say so. If he says
so, he will not make himself understood." This comfortless distance
was increased by the war, but not merely through the real
and legendary atrocities that Germans are reported to have
committed. Rather, what completes the isolation of Germany
in the eyes of other Europeans, what really engenders the attitude
that they are dealing with Hottentots in the Germans (as
it has been aptly put), is the violence, incomprehensible to outsiders
and wholly imperceptible to those imprisoned by it, with
which circumstances, squalor, and stupidity here subjugate
people entirely to collective forces, as the lives of savages alone
are subjected to tribal laws. The most European of all accomplishments,
that more or less discernible irony with which the
life of the individual asserts the right to run its course independently
of the community into which it is cast, has completely
deserted the Germans.

7. The freedom of conversation is being lost. If it was earlier
a matter of course in conversation to take interest in one's
partner, this is now replaced by inquiry into the price of his
shoes or his umbrella. Irresistibly intruding on any convivial
exchange is the theme of the conditions of life, of money. What
this theme involves is not so much the concerns and sorrows of
individuals, in which they might be able to help one another, as
the overall picture. It is as if one were trapped in a theatre and
had to follow the events on the stage whether one wanted to or
not, had to make them again and again, willingly or unwillingly,
the subject of one's thought and speech.

8. Anyone who does not simply refuse to perceive decline will
hasten to claim a special justification for his own continued
presence, his activity and involvement in this chaos. As there
are many insights into the general failure, so there are many
exceptions for one's own sphere of action, place of residence, and
moment of time. A blind determination to save the prestige of
personal existence, rather than, through an impartial disdain
for its impotence and entanglement, at least to detach it from
the background of universal delusion, is triumphing almost
everywhere. That is why the air is so thick with life theories and
world views, and why in this country they cut so presumptuous
a figure, for almost always they finally serve to sanction some
wholly trivial private situation. For just the same reason the air
is so full of phantoms, mirages of a glorious cultural future breaking
upon us overnight in spite of all, for everyone is committed
to the optical illusions of his isolated standpoint.

9. The people cooped up in this country no longer discern
the contours of human personality. Every free man appears to
them as an eccentric. Let us imagine the peaks of the High Alps
silhouetted not against the sky but against folds of dark drapery.
The mighty forms would show up only dimly. In just this way a
heavy curtain shuts off Germany's sky, and we no longer see the
profiles of even the greatest men.

10. Warmth is ebbing from things. The objects of daily use
gently but insistently repel us. Day by day, in overcoming the
sum of secret resistances -- not only the overt ones -- that they
put in our way, we have an immense labour to perform. We must
compensate for their coldness with our warmth if they are not to
freeze us to death, and handle their spines with infinite dexterity,
if we are not to perish by bleeding. From our fellow men we
should expect no succour. Bus conductors, officials, workmen,
salesmen -- they all feel themselves to be the representatives of a
refractory matter whose menace they take pains to demonstrate
through their own surliness. And in the degeneration of things,
with which, emulating human decay, they punish humanity,
the country itself conspires. It gnaws at us like the things, and
the German spring that never comes is only one of countless
related phenomena of decomposing German nature. Here one
lives as if the weight of the column of air supported by everyone
had suddenly, against all laws, become in these regions
perceptible.

11. Any human movement, whether it springs from an intellectual
or even a natural impulse, is impeded in its unfolding
by the boundless resistance of the outside world. Shortage of
houses and the rising cost of travel are in the process of annihilating
the elementary symbol of European freedom, which
existed in certain forms even in the Middle Ages: freedom of
domicile. And if medieval coercion bound men to natural
associations, they are now chained together in unnatural community.
Few things will further the ominous spread of the cult
of rambling as much as the strangulation of the freedom of
residence, and never has freedom of movement stood in greater
disproportion to the abundance of means of travel.

12. Just as all things, in a perpetual process of mingling and
contamination, are losing their intrinsic character while ambiguity
displaces authenticity, so is the city. Great cities-whose
incomparably sustaining and reassuring power encloses those
at work within them in the peace of a fortress and lifts from
them, with the view of the horizon, awareness of the ever vigilant
elemental forces -- are seen to be breached at all points
by the invading countryside. Not by the landscape, but by what
in untrammelled nature is most bitter: ploughed land, highways,
night sky that the veil of vibrant redness no longer conceals.
The insecurity of even the busy areas puts the city dweller in the
opaque and truly dreadful situation in which he must assimilate,
along with isolated monstrosities from the open country,
the abortions of urban architectonics.

13. Noble indifference to the spheres of wealth and poverty
has quite forsaken manufactured things. Each stamps its owner,
leaving him only the choice of appearing a starveling or a
racketeer. For while even true luxury can be permeated by
intellect and conviviality and so forgotten, the luxury goods
swaggering before us now parade such brazen solidity that all
the mind's shafts break harmlessly on their surface.

14. The earliest customs of peoples seem to send us a warning
that in accepting what we receive so abundantly from nature
we should guard against a gesture of avarice. For we are able to
make Mother Earth no gift of our own. It is therefore fitting to
show respect in taking, by returning a part of all we receive
before laying hands on our share. This respect is expressed in the
ancient custom of the libation. Indeed, it is perhaps this immemorial
practice that has survived, transformed, in the prohibition
on gathering forgotten ears of corn or fallen grapes,
these reverting to the soil or to the ancestral dispensers of
blessings. An Athenian custom forbade the picking up of crumbs
at the table, since they belonged to the heroes. If society has so
degenerated through necessity and greed that it can now receive
the gifts of nature only rapaciously, that it snatches the fruit
unripe from the trees in order to sell it most profitably, and is
compelled to empty each dish in its determination to have
enough, the earth will be impoverished and the land yield bad
harvests.