Just as this time is the antithesis of the Renaissance in general, it
contrasts in particular to the situation in which the art of
printing was discovered. For whether by coincidence or not, its
appearance in Germany came at a time when the book in the
most eminent sense of the word, the book of books, had through
Luther's translation become the people's property. Now everything
indicates that the book in this traditional form is nearing
its end. Mallarme, who in the crystalline structure of his certainly
traditionalist writing saw the true image of what was to
come, was in the Coup de dés the first to incorporate the graphic
tensions of the advertisement in the printed page. The typographical
experiments later undertaken by the Dadaists stemmed,
it is true, not from constructive principles but from the
precise nervous reactions of these literati, and were therefore far
less enduring than Mallarme's, which grew out of the inner nature
of his style. But they show up for this very reason the topicality
of what Mallarme, monadically, in his hermetic room, had discovered
through a pre-established harmony with all the decisive
events of our times in economics, technology, and public life.
Printing, having found in the book a refuge in which to lead an
autonomous existence, is pitilessly dragged out onto the street
by advertisements and subjected to the brutal heteronomies of
economic chaos. This is the hard schooling of its new form. If
centuries ago it began gradually to lie down, passing from the
upright inscription to the manuscript resting on sloping desks
before finally taking to bed in the printed book, it now begins
just as slowly to rise again from the ground. The newspaper is
read more in the vertical than in the horizontal plane, while film
and advertisement force the printed word entirely into the
dictatorial perpendicular. And before a child of our time finds
his way clear to opening a book, his eyes have been exposed to
such a blizzard of changing, colourful, conflicting letters that the
chances of his penetrating the archaic stillness of the book are
slight. Locust swarms of print, which already eclipse the sun of
what is taken for intellect for city dwellers, will grow thicker
with each succeeding year. Other demands of business life lead
further. The card index marks the conquest of three-dimensional
writing, and so presents an astonishing counterpoint to the
three-dimensionality of script in its original form as rune or knot
notation. (And today the book is already, as the present mode
of scholarly production demonstrates, an outdated mediation
between two different filing systems. For everything that matters
is to be found in the card box of the researcher who wrote it,
and the scholar studying it assimilates it into his own card index.)
But it is quite beyond doubt that the development of writing
will not indefinitely be bound by the claims to power of a chaotic
academic and commercial activity; rather, quantity is approaching
the moment of a qualitative leap when writing, advancing
ever more deeply into the graphic regions of its new eccentric
figurativeness, will take sudden possession of an adequate factual
content. In this picture writing, poets, who will now as in earliest
times be first and foremost experts in writing, will be able to
participate only by mastering the fields in which (quite unobtrusively)
it is being constructed: the statistical and technical
diagram. With the foundation of an international moving script
they will renew their authority in the life of peoples, and find a
role awaiting them in comparison to which all the innovative
aspirations of rhetoric will reveal themselves as antiquated daydreams.