The furniture style of the second half of the nineteenth century
has received its only adequate description, and analysis, in a
certain type of detective novel at the dynamic centre of which
stands the horror of apartments. The arrangement of the furniture
is at the same time the site plan of deadly traps, and the
suite of rooms prescribes the fleeing victim's path. That this kind
of detective novel begins with Poe -- at a time when such
accommodations hardly yet existed -- is no counter-argument.
For without exception the great writers perform their combinations
in a world that comes after them, just as the Paris streets of
Baudelaire's poems, as well as Dostoevsky's characters, only
existed after 1900. The bourgeois interior of the 1860s to the
1890s, with its gigantic sideboards distended with carvings, the
sunless corners where palms stand, the balcony embattled
behind its balustrade, and the long corridors with their singing
gas flames, fittingly houses only the corpse. "On this sofa the
aunt cannot but be murdered." The soulless luxuriance of the
furnishings becomes true comfort only in the presence of a dead
body. Far more interesting than the Oriental landscapes in
detective novels is that rank Orient inhabiting their interiors:
the Persian carpet and the ottoman, the hanging lamp and the
genuine Caucasian dagger. Behind the heavy, gathered Khilim
tapestries the master of the house has orgies with his share
certificates, feels himself the Eastern merchant, the indolent
pasha in the caravanserai of otiose enchantment, until that
dagger in its silver sling above the divan puts an end, one fine
afternoon, to his siesta and himself. This character of the bourgeois
apartment, tremulously awaiting the nameless murderer
like a lascivious old lady her gallant, has been penetrated by a
number of authors who, as writers of "detective stories" -- and
perhaps also because in their works part of the bourgeois
pandemonium is exhibited -- have been denied the reputation
they deserve. The quality in question has been captured in
isolated writings by Conan Doyle and in a major production by
A. K. Green; and with The Phantom of the Opera, one of the great
novels about the nineteenth century, Gaston Leroux has
brought the genre to its apotheosis.